                                                       
1. Rapid Growth. In 1700 the English colonies contained 250,000 people.        
By 1750, only 50 years later, the population had increased sixfold to          
1,500,000. This rapid growth was due both to a considerable immigration and    
to a high native birth rate.                                                   
2. Variety of Peoples. The English colonies admitted persons of many di-       
verse nationalities and cultures. Thus began the American tradition of the     
melting pot. From the British Isles came the English, Welsh, Scotch.           
Scotch-Irish (of Ulster in northern Ireland), and the Irish. Since the colonies
accepted non-British immigrants too, many settlers came from Continental       
Europe, especially from France and Germany. In Delaware and New York,          
both formerly part of New Netherland, the original settlers were Swedish       
and Dutch.                                                                     
3. Social Classes and Mobility'- The colonial peoples were divided into        
three broad classes: (a) the aristocracy of wealth (planters and merchants)    
and of education (clergymen and lawyers I, (b) the middle class of small       
fanners and skilled workers, and (c) the bottom group of indentured ser-       
vants and slaves. However, colonial classes were not hereditary except for     
the slaves, and colonists moved easily up and down the social ladder.          
COLONIAL EDUCATION                                                             
1. Elementary Education. The colonists were better educated than the           
people of England and Continental Europe. Nevertheless, colonial schooling     
varied, depending upon colony and social status. In general, upper-class chil- 
dren were educated by costly private tutors or in private schools. They        
learned both practical and classical subjects. Children of frontiersmen had    
the least formal education but were often taught the three R’s---reading, ’ril-
ing, and ’rithmetic---by their parents at home.                                
ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTS (1798)                                                   
I Mile the crisis with France was at its height, Federalist partisans in         
I Congress secured the passage of four laws, known as the Alien and Sedition     
I Acts, Some Federalists claimed that the laws were meant to protect the         
1 United States from alien agitators. However, the chief purpose of the laws     
I ns to weaken the Democratic-Republican party.                                  
I 1. The Naturalization Act increased from 5 to 14 years the time required       
I lot immigrants to become American citizens. The Federalists wanted to          
Ihgtlicn the naturalization process since most immigrants, upon becoming         
I Kiiens. voted for Democratic-Republican candidates.                            
I 2. Two Alien Acts gave the President power to deport any alien whom he         
mnsidered dangerous to the United States. Although never used, these two         
I Iffi caused a number of aliens to leave the country and frightened others to   
ttirain from speaking out against the Federalists.                               
3. Tire Sedition Act provided fines and imprisonment for any person who          
uttered or wrote “false, scandalous, and malicious” statements against Con-      
gress or the President. Even Hamilton disapproved this law, and many peo-        
jbeonsidered it a violation of the First Amendment. Nevertheless, the Sedi-      
tion Act remained in effect and was used to bring to trial and convict ten       
Democratic-Republican printers and editors.                                      
                                                                                 
 VIRGINIA AND KENTUCKY RESOLUTIONS (1798-1799)                                   
 Instead of weakening the Democratic-Republican party, the Alien and Se-         
                                                                                 
 ction Acts actually strengthened it. Many people felt that the Federalist       
 putty threatened their civil liberties. Democratic-Republican leaders took      
 drantage of the situation to gain votes for their party.                        
 At the urging of Madison and Jefferson, the state legislatures of Virginia      
 lad Kentucky passed resolutions condemning these acts as unconstitutional.      
 ■The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions presented the states’ rights doctrine,   
 burning that 111 the federal government was created by the states to serve      
 ■ their agent, (2t state legislatures could declare laws of Congress uncon-     
 Ifltstional, and (3) states had the right to declare such unconstitutional      
 [Ins null and void.                                                            
 I Madison and Jefferson intended these resolutions primarily as campaign        
 llmcute for the 1800 Presidential election. Nevertheless, the idea of milli-    
 Ifadion was to plague the United States until the supremacy of the federal      
 jpieminent was conclusively established by the Civil War.                       
tottery owners turned to new labor-saving machines; Labor was also scarce       
in file West. Farmers eagerly turned to new farm machinery to increase their    
productivity.                                                                   
S. Wasteful Agriculture. Since land was so easily available, frontiersmen       
wre not mindful of the need for conservation of soil and forests. They cut      
blown trees senselessly and cultivated the land unwisely, destroying its fertil-
                                                                                
                                                                                
EFFECTS OF THE CLOSE OF THE FRONTIER                                            
I Turner stated that the close of the frontier, ending the era of cheap or free 
Bind, caused many of the problems that face us today.                           
I 1. Labor. Discontented factory workers no longer had the “safety valve”       
■ easily available land in the West. These workers therefore remained in        
he industrial East and turned to labor unions to improve their conditions,      
lite struggle between capital and labor now intensified.                        
I 1 Immigration. Immigrants could no longer easily acquire farms. More of       
Ito now crowded into the cities and competed for jobs in the factories.         
Bnerieans began to demand restrictions upon immigration.                        
II Conservation. With the close of the frontier, the American people            
■nkenol to the need for conservation. Farmers realized that they had to         
ne better care of their land. Timber and mining companies came to the           
|w- realization about their resources. Federal and state agencies started       
fcects to conserve the nation’s soil, water, timber, and other natural re-      
|t Imperialism. American capitalists, who had looked to the frontier for        
»materials, markets, and investment opportunities, now began to look            
■where. As a result, the United States embarked on a program of eco-            
fcjtand political imperialism in the Caribbean, Central and South Amer-         
L and the Far East.                                                             
MKISM OF TURNER’S FRONTIER THEORY                                               
■Many historians believe that Turner exaggerated the importance of the          
■ter. They claim that Turner ignored the following facts: (11 American          
^kocracy was fostered by our democratic heritage from England and by            
^■demands of workers in the industrial East for a voice in government. (2)      
developed a democratic form of government without the existence                 
111 frontier. (3) The Southwestern frontier, settled by cotton planters, de-    
Mbpedneither democracy nor nationalism. (4 ) The frontier did not serve as      
Itoaiety valve” for many Eastern factory workers, since they lacked             
foodstuffs and fibers at lower prices, (d) Taxpayers would gain relief, since     
direct subsidies were expected to cost less than higher price supports.           
3. Problem of the Poor in Rural Areas                                             
a. Impoverished Farmers. Two million farmers are unable to earn a de-             
tent living in agriculture. Their average income, including home-grown food       
Ind government benefits, is less than S3000 per year. Eventually, some will       
lAchieve profitable farm operations. Others will combine farming with part-       
lie employment in industry. Most will leave the soil.                             
| The government has assisted these farmers by two laws: (1) The Hural            
tan Development Act (1961) provided loans for low-income farmers to               
rerpand their landholdings to an adequate size; created new niral jobs by         
Iremmunity projects, such as home repairs and water-system construction;          
 tacouraged new industry in rural areas; and granted funds for occupational      
I retraining of farmers. (2) The Economic Opportunity Act < 1964), the major      
I law in President Johnson’s “war on poverty,” dealt with rural as well as        
I urban areas. It encouraged rural communities to undertake job-creating          
Inti-poverty projects and offered farm youths further education, new work         
laperience, and vocational training. (For a discussion of the “war on pov-        
I ffly," see pages 357-358.)                                                      
b. Migratory Workers. These workers total possibly a half million.                
I They travel from region to region and find employment chiefly on large com-     
■ Btrcial farms at peak periods such as harvest-time. Working about 140 days      
jtyearand earning about §1000 a year, they live in extreme poverty. Until         
]’.se 1960's their plight evoked little government concern, and their efforts to  
I tem unions were blocked by the commercial farmers.                              
I In 1964 the migratory workers benefited when Congress prohibited theim-         
■ prution of temporary Mexican farm laborers. In 1966 grape pickers in Cal-       
■iomia went on strike and, rallying widespread public support, forced their       
fcployers to recognize their union.                                               
I L Rising Farm Income. Farm income in 1965 reached a record of over              
I MOO per farm, a gain of nearly 40 percent in five years. The farmers re-        
Mining in agriculture have shared in the nation's prosperity and are catch-       
Infupwith nonfarm workers. In 1966 Secretary of Agriculture Orville Free-         
confidently stated, “The farm economy is healthier today than at any              
■other time for more than a decade, and it will continue to improve.”             
UNITED STATES, A NATION OF IMMIGRANTS                                           
I Except for the Indians, all Americans are immigrants or the descendants       
of immigrants. During the colonial period, settlers came by the thousands,      
prom the end of the American Revolution to today, some 45 million people        
have migrated to our shores.                                                    
IEASONS FOR IMMIGRATION                                                         
■ 1. Economic. European farmers were discouraged as they tried to reap an       
■ adequate crop from small and worn-out lands. Farmers were driven from the     
■ soil as the Agricultural Revolution brought about a change from subsistence   
■ to large-scale commercial farming. European city workers were disheartened    
1 by low wages, and many workers faced unemployment as the Industrial           
■Revolution hastened the use of machines. Immigrants looked to America as a     
■ and of opportunity, where fertile lands could be acquired at little or no cost
j and where the expanding economy provided steady employment at decent          
■wages.                                                                         
I 2. Political. Most European governments were controlled by the upper          
HRa$ses. and the common people had little or no say in political matters. Im-   
Baigr.'ints looked to democratic America, where the ordinary citizen had a      
Wrong voice in the government.                                                  
I 3. Social. European society was characterized by rigid class distinctions,    
■In* educational opportunities for the lower classes, and discrimination        
■teainst religious minorities. As World War I approached, most governments      
■quired young men to serve terms of compulsory military service. Immi-          
Ipants looked to America as a land of equality, where they could rise in so-    
■ status, provide an education for their children, practice their religion      
without fear, and be free of compulsory military service.                       
MIDSHIPS OF IMMIGRATION                                                         
■Immigrants were the uprooted, having left their friends, relatives, and        
■Miive lands. Being poor, most immigrants came in the most undesirable sec-     
Basof ships, where conditions were often crowded and unsanitary. In the         
United States, they faced the hardships of having to adjust to a new lan-    
guage and culture. Nevertheless, they were eager to seek their new home-     
land.                                                                        
IMMIGRATION FROM THE END OF THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR TO                         
THE CLOSE OF THE FRONTIER (1783-1890)                                        
1. Major Periods of Immigration                                              
a. To the Age of Jackson (1783-1830). At first, immigrants came in a         
slow but steady stream. Immigration increased as travel became easier with   
the close of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815. During the years 1821-1830.        
113,000 immigrants came to the United States.                                
b. To the Beginning of the Civil War (1831-1860). In the next three          
decades, immigrants came in rapidly rising numbers: 1831 1840 : 600,000:     
1841-1850: 1.700.000; 1851-1860 : 2,600.000. Most of these immigrants        
came from Ireland and Germany. The Irish, long denied self-government by     
England, received their main stimulus to migrate in the 1840's, when they    
were afflicted by a potato famine. Germans who had migrated for economic     
reasons were joined, after the failure of the Revolution of 1848, by German  
liberals and intellectuals, who came to escape political persecution.        
c. To the Close of the Frontier (1861-1890). After being temporarily         
slowed by the Civil War. immigration again began rising, from 2.800,000 in   
the years 1871-1880 to 5.200,000 in the years 1881-1890. Immigrants after    
the Civil War were attracted by the claims of agents and by advertisements   
of steamship companies and land-grant railroads, and by “America letters” of 
praise sent by earlier immigrants.                                           
Immigrants continued coming from England, Ireland, and Germany.              
Farmers came from the Scandinavian countries of Sweden. Norway, and          
Denmark to look for abundant and fertile soil.                               
2. Americans Welcomed Immigration. Most Americans considered immi-           
grants an asset to our growing nation. Immigrants represented (a) workers    
for factories, mines, ami railroads, (b 1 fanners for Western lands, (c) con-
sumers for the products of agriculture and industry, (d) men of special abil-
ities, talents, and skills, and (e) military strength for the nation.        
Americans took pride in their country’s tradition as a haven for the op-     
pressed. Emma Lazarus expressed the feelings of most Americans in her        
poem “The New Colossus,” which is inscribed on the base of the Statue of     
Liberty in New York Harbor: “Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled     
masses yearning to breathe free.”                                            
3. Early Opposition to Immigration: The “Know-Nothings.” Some Ameri-         
cans disapproved of the Irish and German immigrants for taking jobs away     
from native Americans, for failing to assimilate into American society, and      
mostly just for being Catholic. By the 1850’s nativist (anti-foreign) and        
anti-Catholic groups had formed a number of societies, the most influential      
being the Know-Nothings. This society was so called because its mem-             
bers, pledged to secrecy, answered “I know nothing” when asked about             
the society. The Know-Nothings purported to defend Protestantism against         
Catholicism and sought to restrict immigrat ion. To further their goals, they    
ran candidates for political office. Despite initial political gains, the society
mn died out, as Americans rejected religious intolerance and concentrated        
upon the problems of slavery and sectionalism.                                   
4. “Old Immigrants”: Characteristics. Historians have traditionally re-          
ferred to the people coming before 1890 as “old immigrants.” The “old immi-      
grants” originated chiefly from northern and western Europe: Great Britain,      
Ireland, Germany, Holland, France, and the Scandinavian countries of Den-        
mark, Norway, and Sweden. They arrived while the frontier was still open,        
l and many settled on farms in the West. It has been claimed that, since these   
[“old immigrants” possessed customs and traditions similar to those of Amer-     
| ions, they adjusted easily to American ways of life.                           
| IMMIGRATION FROM THE CLOSE OF THE FRONTIER TO THE                              
| BEGINNING OF WORLD WAR I (1890-1914)                                           
I 1. “New Immigrants”: Characteristics. Historians have traditionally re-        
Iferrod to the people coming after 1890 as the “new immigrants." They came       
I in greater numbers than immigrants had ever come before. From 1901 to          
11910 some 8,800,000 persons entered the United States. Unlike the "old im-      
jaigrants,” the “new immigrants” originated chiefly in southern and eastern      
■Europe: Italy, Greece, Austria-Hungary, Serbia, Rumania, Russian Poland,        
|and Russia. They arrived when the frontier was closed and therefore settled     
■ diiefly in the cities as factory workers. It has been claimed that, since the  
i "new immigrants” possessed customs and traditions different from those of      
■Americans. they experienced difficulty in adjusting to American ways of life.   
| 2. Typical Migratory Groups. Italians, Serbs, and Greeks fled poverty.         
■People.- in the despotic Austro-Hungarian and Russian Empires fled heavy        
■taxes and, as World War I approached, compulsory military service. Jews in      
■Russia and in Russian-controlled Poland had long been forced to live in spe-    
Bnal districts, called the Pale oj Settlement, and had been subjected to edu-    
Intional restrictions and to legal and economic discrimination. They now         
H ied Czarist-inspired outbreaks of anti-Semitic violence, called pogroms.       
I 3. Opposition to Immigration. Many Americans disapproved of the “new           
■migrants,” arguing as follows: (a) With the frontier closed, there was no       
■Bore free or cheap land for immigrants, (b) American industry had suffi-        
cient workers, and “new immigrants” competed with and took jobs away         
from native Americans. This argument was emphasized by labor unions, (cl     
The “new immigrants” were difficult to Americanize. They had little educa-   
tion. They settled in large cities, creating their own ghettos, and felt no  
need to learn American ways. Their ghettos were becoming breeding places     
of disease and crime, (d) Some people argued that the "new immigrants"       
were physically and mentally inferior to the “old immigrants.” This was      
known as the “theory of Nordic supremacy.”                                   
4. In Defense of the “New Immigrants.” (a) The "new immigrants” as-          
similated as well as had the Irish and German “old immigrants." Critics of   
the “new immigrants” forgot that the Germans, too, had clung to their na-    
tive tongue and that the Irish had been impoverished and uneducated. The     
Irish and the Germans had also been accused of being clannish and of not     
assimilating quickly into the American Protestant society, (b) The “new im-  
migrants” who flocked to the cities were joined by native Americans who      
moved in from the farms. Both groups contributed to the urban problems of    
slums, disease, and crime. Again, critics of the “new immigrants” forgot that
the Irish, too, had settled in the cities, (cl The “new immigrants” provided 
the additional workers needed by our growing industry. Furthermore, they     
stimulated industrial growth by enlarging the domestic market for goods.     
(d) Reputable scientists rejected the theory of Nordic supremacy as false.   
(e) The “new immigrants" contributed greatly to American life.               
EARLY STEPS RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION                                          
1. The Chinese Exclusion Act (1882| began the prohibition of the immi-       
gration of Chinese. The law was passed following agitation and riots on the  
West Coast against cheap “coolie” labor. The prohibition lasted until World  
War II.                                                                      
2. The Gentlemen’s Agreement (19071 contained a promise by the Japa-         
nese government to deny passports to Japanese laborers seeking to migrate    
to the United States. Negotiated by President Theodore Roosevelt, it fol-    
lowed anti-Japanese race riots in California, and local and state laws dis-  
criminating against Japanese immigrants. In 1924 Congress unilaterally       
ended the Gentlemen’s Agreement by prohibiting all Japanese immigration      
to the United States.                                                        
3. The Literacy Test Act (19171 required immigrants to be able to read       
English or their own language before entering the United States. This tot    
was passed over a veto by President Wilson, who insisted that literacy indi- 
cated not mental ability, but merely that an immigrant had received the op-  
portunity to go to school.                                                   
RESTRICTIVE IMMIGRATION LAWS FOLLOWING WORLD WAR I                                
When World War I ended, Americans withdrew emotionally from world                 
affairs, and their isolationist sentiments reinforced their opposition to immi-   
gration. At the same time, Americans experienced a “Red scare,” occasioned        
by the Communist seizure of the Russian government in 1917. Americans             
feared that foreign radicals would infiltrate the United States. The Ku Klux      
Klan added its voice to demand protection of "white Protestant America.”          
Congress passed the following restrictive immigration laws:                       
1. The Emergency Quota Act of 1921 limited the annual number of immi-             
grants from each nation to 3 percent of the foreign-born jrersons from that       
nation residing in the United States according to the 1910 census. This limi-     
tation set a ceiling on total immigration from outside the Western Hemisphere     
oi 350.000 annually.                                                              
 1 The Immigration Act of 1924 reduced immigration quotas to 2 percent            
 tnd shifted the base date to 1890, thereby favoring the admission of persons     
                                                                                  
 ftmiing from lands from which the “old immigrants” had come. This act also       
 wtained more permanent regulations, which became the National Origins            
 Elan.                                                                            
 3. National Origins Plan of 1929                                                 
      a. Provisions. This plan (1) permitted no more than 150,000 immigrants     
 bun outside the Western Hemisphere to enter the United States per year,          
 h allotted each country a quota in proportion to the number of persons in        
 le United States having that national origin according to the census of          
 EO. (3) granted each eligible nation at least 100 immigrants per year, < 4 >     
 feed no restrictions on immigration from the Western Hemisphere, and             
 5) prohibited all immigration from Asian countries. ( Following World War        
 I,Asian countries were included in the quota plan, most receiving a quota        
 1100 inunigrants per year.)                                                      
                                                                                  
      b. Effects. The National Origins Plan, coupled with the Depression of      
 629. sharply curtailed immigration. From 1931 to 1940, a total of only           
 RO,.000 immigrants arrived at our shores. Most quotas remained unfilled,         
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
                                                                                  
 tottially those for northern and western Europe, and annual immigration          
 tamed far below the quota limit.                                                 
 ■LACED PERSONS PROBLEM                                                           
 I Alter World War II. Europe contained many millions of refugees, or dis-        
 jfcrt’d persons, including (D survivors of the German concentration camps,       
      dally Jews, anti-Nazi Germans, and anti-Nazis of nations overrun by        
      aany who wanted to start life anew, far from Europe, (2) slave laborers.   
chiefly eastern Europeans, who had been forced to work in Germany during       
the war and who refused to return home to Communist rule, and (3) escap-       
ees from Communist rule in eastern Europe. The plight of the refugees          
touched American sympathies. Congress passed several Displaced Persons         
Acts which by 1956 allowed into the United States some 600,000 refugees        
above the yearly immigration quotas.                                           
McCARRAN-WALTER ACT OF 1952                                                    
This comprehensive Immigration and Nationality Act revised and codified        
our previous laws regarding immigration and naturalization.                    
1. Provisions. The new law (a > restated the National Origins Plan by set-     
ting a limit of 154.000 immigrants per year and by granting each country a     
quota based on the 1920 census, (fa) allowed each Asian country a quota,       
usually 100 immigrants per year, (c) required the careful screening of im-     
migrants to keep out subversives and other security risks, and (di eased the   
procedures for revoking the citizenship of recently naturalized citizens who   
joined Communist or Communist-front organizations and for deporting un-        
desirable aliens.                                                              
2. Arguments for the Act. (a) The total of 154,000 admissions per year         
from outside the Western Hemisphere prevented the flooding of the United       
States with immigrants, (fa) The use of the national origins system preserved  
the "nationality make-up" of our population, (ci The law rejected any racial   
bias by admitting immigrants from Asian countries, (d) The danger of           
Communism made necessary the provisions for tighter screening, for revok-      
ing citizenship, and for deporting undesirable aliens.                         
3. Arguments Against the Act. (a) The United States, with its relatively       
low population density, could absorb a larger number of immigrants per         
year, (b) The use of national origins quotas discriminated against immi-       
grants from eastern and southern Europe and from Asia. The law assigned a      
quota of 109.000 out of a total of 154.000 to three countries: Great Britain.  
Germany, and Ireland. Unused quotas could not be transferred to nations        
that had already filled their quotas, (cl The census of 1960. not of 1920,     
should have been used, (d) The screening provisions were so strict that they   
might serve to exclude immigrants worthy of admission, (el The law made        
recently naturalized citizens into “second-class citizens." since they could be
denaturalized and deported for committing certain acts for which natural-      
bom citizens could not be similarly punished.                                  
President Truman vetoed the McCarran-Waiter Bill as “repressive and            
inhumane.” Congress overrode the President’s veto. Subsequently, Presidents    
Eisenhower, Kennedy, and Johnson all requested a revision of our immigra-      
tion laws.                                                                     
IMMIGRATION ACT OF 1965                                                          
At President Johnson’s urging. Congress in 1965 passed a law considerably        
changing our immigration policies. To symbolize the significance of the new      
law, President Johnson signed it at the foot of the Statue of Liberty.           
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
1. Provisions, (a) Effective in 1968. the law abolished the national origins     
tystan. (6) For countries outside the Western Hemisphere, it established a       
quota of 170,000 immigrants per year. (cI For countries within the Western       
Hemisphere, the law established a quota for the first time. This quota was       
jet at 120.000 immigrants per year. (d} The law set a limit of 20,000 immi-      
grants per year from any one nation, (e) It provided standards for admit-        
ting immigrants according to the following priorities: (1) close relatives of    
fnited States residents, (2» scientists, artists, professional people, and       
ifelledand unskilled workers needed to fill labor shortages, anti (3) refugees   
■ran Communist rule or from natural calamity, (/» The law permitted up to        
ffiDOO close relatives of American citizens to immigrate to the United States    
each year without counting against the quota of 170,000.                         
                                                                                 
2. Significant Changes, (a) The new law replaced the national origins            
■stem, with its stress upon race and nationality, by a priority system cm-       
alm.’iziiig family relationship, value to the United States, and motive for      
migrating, (b) It cut down the number of immigrants from within the West-        
en Hemisphere from about 150,000 in 1965 to a maximum of 120,000. (cl It         
Med the preference given north and west European nations, and placed             
fem on an equal footing with other countries, (d) It permitted an increase       
■ the number of immigrants from Asia, Africa, and southern and eastern           
iurope.                                                                         
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
                                                                                 
 IMMIGRANTS AND DISCRIMINATION                                                   
I Each group of immigrants faced discrimination at the hands of native           
JnKTieans---themselves descendants of earlier immigrants. Those immi-            
■nts who settled in cities and sought factory work were particularly af-         
■tud. 111 Economically. They were the last to be hired, kept at the poorest      
Ms and the first to be fired. (2) Socially. They were confined to ghettos        
Jed slums; excluded from the better hotels, restaurants, and clubs; and often    
■fed admission to institutions of higher learning. Nevertheless, by dis-         
saving natural ability and determination, these immigrants achieved suc-         
■saml acceptance. Irishman and German, Italian and Slav, Jew and Cath-           
■ie-all suffered from discrimination, all strove valiantly, and all entered      
■mainstream of American life.                                                    
CONTRIBUTIONS OF IMMIGRANT GROUPS TO AMERICA                                   
1. Cultural. The immigrants brought the cultural heritages of their native     
lands to America. With time, certain features of these heritages died out      
while other features survived. The surviving features can still be seen in such
aspects of American life as our foods, music, literature, sports, and language,
all of which reflect a variety of contributions by immigrants. Perhaps most    
important, the cultural and religious divenrity of immigrants promoted a       
spirit of toleration among most Americans. Because the United States suc-      
cessfully absorbed different peoples anil heritages to form a new American     
nationality, typified by its own culture, the United States has been called a  
melting pot.                                                                   
2. Economic. The immigrants were eager for honest, useful work. Immi-          
grants from each nation found employment in many industries. Neverthe-         
less, many groups have become identified with specific industries. Scandina-   
vians farmed the land. Irishmen and Italians built canals, railroads, and      
bridges. Jews worked in the garment industry. Poles and other Slavs, as well   
as Hungarians, mined coal and iron orc, and labored in the steel mills.        
The immigrants increased the demand for the products of agriculture and        
industry, thereby further encouraging American economic growth. Also, by       
coming to the United States in especially great numbers during times of        
business expansion, immigrants served to prevent any shortage of labor.        
Finally, many immigrants brought special talents and became prominent          
in such varied fields as science, education, medicine, and the arts.           
SOME OUTSTANDING IMMIGRANTS                                                    
1. British. Alexander Graham Bell, inventor of the telephone; steel mag-       
nate and philanthropist Andrew Carnegie; physician and surgeon William         
IF. Mayo; labor leader Philip Murray; chemist Joseph Priestley.                
2. Chinese. Architect Ieoh Ming Pei; theoretical physicists Chen A'hi?         
Yang and Tsung Dao Lee; writer Lin Yutang.                                     
3. French. Gunpowder manufacturer Eleuthere Irence DuPont, whose1              
company evolved into today's giant chemical concern; architect Pterrc          
Charles L’Enfant, who provided the basic design for the city of Washington,    
D.C.; opera star Lily Pons.                                                    
4. German. Governor John Peter Altgeld of Illinois; optical equipment          
manufacturers John J. Bausch and Henry Lomb; engineer and designer of          
the Brooklyn Bridge, John Boehling; civil service reformer Carl Schurz; elec-  
trical engineer Charles Steinmetz.                                             
g| their population still living in rural areas, were North Dakota, Missis-                     
 sippi. West Virginia, Vermont, South Dakota, and North Carolina.                              
I Our five most populous cities were New York, Chicago, Los Angeles, Phil-                      
adelphia, and Detroit.                                                                          
REASONS FOR THE GROWTH OF CITIES                                                                
I I. Industrial Revolution. As industries arose, workers congregated about                      
Ilk factories. These workers added to existing city populations or created                      
I new cities. Because urban dwellers needed food, clothing, entertainment,                      
I and professional services, still more people came to the cities.                              
I 2. Social and Cultural Attractions. Many people were attracted to cities                      
Iliysocial and cultural facilities: colleges and universities, theaters and mov-                
I is, symphonies, libraries, and lecture forums.                                                
I 3. Improved Transportation and Communication. The railroads, telegraph                        
■ tars, and telephones that served the cities enabled the city dwellers to («)                  
■ obtain foodstuffs and other essentials, (b) distribute the products of city                   
■factories throughout the land, and (c) conduct business transactions quickly                   
I und efficiently from a central office.                                                        
I 4. Decreasing Farm Population. Farmers and farm laborers were driven                          
Man the countryside by the (at drabness and hardships of farm life. (!>)                        
■low agricultural prices and difficult times, especially following the Civil War                
Bini again following World War I, and (r) increased mechanization and                           
■jnrntli of commercial farming.                                                                 
         5. Immigration From Europe. During most of the 19th century, some “old                 
         immigrants,” including many Germans and Irishmen, settled in cities. After             
                                                                                                
         Itrlose of the frontier in 1890, the “new immigrants” overwhelmingly set-              
         m in cities. These urban settlers found jobs in city factories and other               
         wincss establishments. As newcomers unfamiliar with American culture,                  
         ■ty preferred to live among fellow immigrants who spoke their native                   
         Bngne. National groups tended to congregate in special sections of a city.             
         Itliereby forming ghettos.                                                             
                                                                                                
               6. Migrations of Negroes, Puerto Ricans, and Mexicans                            
               a. Negroes. In the 20th century, Negro migrants left the rural areas of          
               kSouth for urban centers. Some Negroes moved to cities in the South, but         
               ■removed to cities in the West and North. By 1960 only half of our Negro         
               Fl'Ulntion remained in the South, and these lived chiefly in cities. The other   
               Wl lived in the West and North, overwhelmingly concentrated in major             
               iduiti centers. Negroes constituted large minorities in America’s five most      
               fculous cities, all Western and Northern.                                        
tion for cities and suburbs in both houses of state legislatures and in the fed-
eral House of Representatives. City officials hope that this change will mean   
greater attention by legislatures to urban problems.                            
                                                                                
                                                                                
POVERTY AMONG RURAL AND URBAN PEOPLES                                           
PROBLEMS OF POVERTY                                                             
1. Extent of Poverty. In 1960, despite our post-World War II affluence. 10      
million American families lived in poverty. They struggled to secure the ne-    
cessities of life with yearly incomes of less than S3000. These 10 million im-  
poverished families, about 4 million being rural and 6 million urban, totaled   
35 million individuals, or about 20 percent of our total population.            
2. Causes of Poverty                                                            
a. Lack of Training. Millions of Americans have never received voca-            
tional or professional training. Filling only low-skill or no-skill jobs, they  
receive little pay and face frequent unemployment.                              
b. Worn-Out Farms. Many small farmers, working a few acres of ex-               
hausted land, eke out a difficult living. They lack the capital to acquire siz- 
able fertile lands and to buy expensive machines. They live in areas that do    
not afford adequate health and educational facilities. A number of rural poor   
have abandoned their farms and moved to the cities, but, lacking education      
and skills, they remain impoverished.                                           
c. Old Age. With medical science prolonging life, the number of aged            
has steadily increased. Unable to find work, many old persons find their in-    
comes reduced to the poverty level.                                             
cl. Death or Desertion of the Father. Many families are plunged into            
poverty when the father dies or deserts his family. The mother, lacking job     
skills and burdened by young children, is unable to support a family by her-    
self.                                                                           
e. Discrimination. Minority groups, including Puerto Ricans, Mexicans,          
and Negroes, have suffered discrimination in education, housing, and jobs       
They suffer poverty both because of discrimination in hiring and because oi     
their lack of skills.                                                           
Children of impoverished families are often born into an environment of         
despair and hopelessness, and do not receive the training necessary to rise     
out of poverty. From generation to generation, they remain chained to a         
cycle of poverty.                                                               
2. Beginnings of Civil Service Reform. Hayes antagonized the regular, or                               
Stalwart,” Republicans by trying to curtail political patronage: dismissing                            
unneeded and incompetent employees; forbidding officeholders from being                                
iissessed political contributions; and naming as his Secretary’ of the Interior                        
the Liberal Republican advocate of civil sen ice reform, Carl Schurz.                                  
I 3. Hayes’ Anti-Labor Acts, (a) Hayes employed federal troops in 1877                                 
I against the railroad strikers, (b) Hayes vetoed a Chinese exclusion bill,                            
I timing that it violated our treaty with China. He was condemned as fa-                               
ltering cheap “coolie" labor.                                                                          
IMPORTANT DOMESTIC LEGISLATION: SILVER COINAGE                                                         
I The Bland-Allison Act 118781, passed over Hayes’ veto, provided that the                             
Ktemment purchase and coin a limited quantity of silver.                                               
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                       
                                        GARFIELD-ARTHUR ADMINISTRATION: 1881-1885                     
                                                      (REPUBLICAN)                                    
                                                                                                       
 MAJOR POLITICAL ASPECTS                                                                               
                                                                                                       
                         I. Election of 1880. The Republican convention, split between rival fac-      
                         ias, turned on the 36th ballot to a compromise candidate, Ohio Congress-      
                                                                                                       
                         un James A. Garfield. The Democrats nominated a former Union general,         
                         fin/kW .8. Hancock. The campaign was undistinguished as to issues, but the    
                         publicans were well organized and expended heavy funds. Despite a very        
                         plead in popular votes. Garfield won easily in the electoral college.         
                         I Assassination of Carfield (1881). In office less than four months. Gar-     
                         ni was fatally shot by a disappointed officeseeker. He was succeeded by       
                         la Vice President, C hester A. Arthur.                                        
                         11 Arthur as President (1881-1885): The Office Makes the Man. Though          
                         ■ hi been a machine politician, Arthur rose to the responsibilities of his    
                         ■it by maintaining an able and honest administration. He began modemi-        
                         ■tatif the American navy by constructing steel warships; fought corrup-       
                         fc: and strongly supported civil sen-ice reform.                              
                         WORTANT DOMESTIC LEGISLATION                                                  
                         I h The Chinese Exclusion Act (1882), passed after revision of our treaty     
                         kalians with China, suspended the immigration of Chinese laborers. (2)        
                         ■t Pendleton Act (18831 set the basis of our present federal civil service    
■aval power unless for aggression. No agreement was reached; soon after-       
■rds Japan started a new naval race.                                           
 3. The United States Joins in International Pacts                            
                                                                              
a. Nine-Power Treaty at the Washington Conference (1921-1922). The             
Failed States, Japan, Britain. France, and five smaller nations agreed to      
 >port equal trading rights in China and to respect China's independence,     
 is reaffirming the Open Door Policy.                                         
                                                                              
 b. Kellogg-Briand Pact (1928). Frank Kellogg, American Secretary of          
 lie, and Aristide Briand. French Foreign Minister, proposed a pact to set-   
 all disputes peacefully and to outlaw war "as an instrument of national      
policy.” Most nations, including Germany. Japan, and Italy, signed this        
idealistic statement, also called the Pact of Paris.                           
I c. Failure of International Pacts. In the 1930's militarist Japan. Fascist   
Italy, and Nazi Germany all violated the Kellogg-Briand Pact. Japan also       
|wl:it<-d the Nine-Power Treaty. Without provision for enforcement and         
■itliout restraining action by the other signatories, these agreements proved  
■irthless.                                                                     
                                                                               
FURTHER EVIDENCES OF ISOLATION BY THE UNITED STATES                            
11. Refusal to Join the World Court. The World Court was established by        
■f League to settle disputes between nations according to international law.   
■spite the requests of four successive Presidents---Harding, Coolidge, lloo-   
E and Roosevelt -Senate isolationists managed to keep the United States        
u membership in the World Court. They insisted that the World Court            
ms a “back door" into the League.                                              
1 Immigration Restrictions. Congress passed a series of immigration laws       
[ng our "open house” policy and drastically limiting admissions. Con-          
hus expressed American sentiment for fewer world contacts---an as-             
' isolationism.                                                                
tisistence Upon Repayment ot War Debts. During World War I the                 
can Allies---mainly Britain, France, and Italy---had borrowed $10 bil-         
ora the United States. Thereafter, the Allies suggested that the United        
cancel the war debts because they (a) had spent the money, chiefly             
K American war materials, to secure victory for the United States as well      
■ lor themselves, (hl could not repay as long as America’s high tariffs made   
■difficult for them to secure dollars, and (c) could not repay unless they     
