1. In the early I700's, cloth and other household articles were usually made by hand. The women of the house made cloth on the spinning wheel and the hand loom. But this was all changed when English inventors made machines for spinning thread and weaving cloth. In 1767, James Hargreaves invented the spinning jenny. This machine could spin a number of threads at once. The old spinning wheel could not keep up with it. Edward Cartwright, another Englishman, invented a loom for weaving which was run by water power. In 1769, James Watt invented a steam engine that could turn spinning wheels, looms and other machines. 2. The new machines were expensive. They could be bought only by rich men. They were placed in large buildings called factories and workers were hired to run the machines. In the factory system, the owner had the machines but he did not work them himself. The machines for spinning and weaving had been taken out of the home. The workers moved out of the home, too. This change in making goods—from hand to machine, from home to factory—is called the Industrial Revolution. 3. England did not want to share her new machines with the other nations. Laws were passed forbidding anyone to take plans or models of the new machines out of the country. In spite of these laws, the new inventions spread to America through the efforts of Samuel Slater. Slater had worked in the factories in England and had learned how to make a machine for spinning thread. Slater then had come to the United States. In 1790, he set up, from memory, a spinning machine and a power loom in Rhode Island. 4. The first factories in the United States began in New England. There were several reasons for the beginning of factories in the northeastern states. For a long time. Americans had bought their manufactured goods from England. During the War of 1812, people of the United States could not get these goods from England. At the same time, the war kept American ships at home. The seaports of Boston and Salem were not busy. The traders and shipowners therefore took some of their idle money to start the first factories. 5. Early factories had to be built near a source of water power. New England had many streams to provide this power. Later, when the machines were run by steam, coal was needed. Nearby Pennsylvania had a vast supply of coal that was easy to reach. 6. The new machines could not be run without workers. The sandy New England soil had never been good farm land. There were many people in New England who were therefore willing to leave their farm lands to work in the factories. Also, from 1820 to 1860. many people came to the United States from the countries of Europe. Most of these people settled in the cities of the Northeast where they could find work in the factories. Very few went south looking for work because of the use of slaves in that section of the country. 7. Many changes took place in the Northeast because of this Industrial Revolution. The population grew rapidly. Cities grew. The northeastern states had about 17,500.000 people in 1860, making them the most thickly settled part of the United States. People crowded together in cities to be near their place of work. Slave labor was not suited for factory work. In the years following the Revolutionary War, the northern states freed their slaves. The North had about 250,000 freed Negroes by the middle of the 19th century. 8. In the Northeast a whole new class of people arose—the factory workers. Their working day was from twelve to fifteen hours long. Children as young as seven or eight years of age could be found in factories. In spite of the long hours and hard work, pay was low. Men received about $5 per week; women about $2; and the children about $1 per week. Although wages were low, prices were low, too. A room and meals could be had for $1.25 to $2.00 per week. Women could get away from factory work by marrying someone with a good job. Men planned to move to the cheap land in the West if they tired of city life. 9. With the growth of factories a smaller class of wealthy manufacturers also appeared. Merchants who had made their wealth in shipping now made money through dealing in factory- made goods. These groups of men became known as "captains of industry." These were the men who built the factories and owned ships and railroads. Americans Come from All Over the World AIM: To learn why people from many lands came to the United States. 1. The United States would not have grown into such a great industrial nation without the help of men and women who came to this country from other lands, the immigrants. They came to America for many reasons: a better living, the freedom to think and worship as they pleased, and a better education for their families. 2. We have always been a nation of immigrants. Early settlers in the United States came chiefly from Britain. Negroes were taken to Virginia in 1619 and forced into slavery. There were also Dutch. German and Swedish settlements along the Atlantic Coast. Most of the people began to speak English and live according to English customs. As a result, our language and many laws came from the English. 3. For a long time after the American Revolution. most of the immigrants came from countries of northern and western Europe. These people became known as the "old immigrants." They came to America when there was still a frontier, and much cheap land was available. I. A great migration of Irish to the United States took place in the I840's and 1850's. Millions of people left Ireland during these years because of a potato famine in Ireland. This was the period of improvements in transportation in America. Many of the Irish were able to find work building the new canals and railroads. At about the same time, large numbers of Germans came to America in search of freedom. The German people had no voice in their government. Many of these people settled in the Middle West where land was cheap. People also came from Norway, Sweden and Denmark to farm in the Middle West. 5. In the 1850's and 1860's, immigrants came from China. They worked in the mining camps of the West. Many found jobs on the railroads that were built across the West. (>. The years from 1870 to 1910 were the years of the heaviest immigration. Twenty million people came to the United States during this period. Our industries were growing rapidly. Jobs were plentiful. There was a need for men to do the heavy work in our factories. During this period there w'as a change in the countries from which the immigrants came. 7. These "new immigrants" were the Italians, the Slavs, the Jews, the Poles and others from southern and eastern Europe. Their homelands were poor. They came to America at a time when the best farmlands were settled. These immigrants therefore settled chiefly in the cities and worked in factories. Many had to take jobs at very low wages. It has always been the newcomer to America who has had to take the hard and disagreeable tasks. Most of the immigrants landed in New York City when they first came to America. In the harbor they saw the Statue of Liberty—a tall figure holding a torch high above her head. The people of France had given Miss Liberty to the people of the United States in 1876. On the base of the statue is written: "Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free... 9. When the immigrants came, they often lived near people who had come from their own country. These neighborhoods were often called "ghettos." In these ghettos, the people often kept their own language and customs from Europe. The immigrants brought colorful songs and dances, different foods and new ideas to America. Despite their early hardships, many fine Americans came out of the ghettos and did much to make America grow. Our way of life owes much to these "newcomers" to our land. 10. The immigrant families learned how to be Americans in the public schools. Their children learned to speak English and to play with children of different backgrounds and religions. They began to talk and dress like other American children. The schools also had night classes for the parents. In these classes, the immigrants were taught the English language and American history to help them become citizens. 11. The Japanese were a late immigrant group. Most arrived from 1900 to 1910 and settled in Hawaii or along our West Coast. From the beginning they were set apart because they were members of the yellow race and had different customs. Other Americans were often unkind to them. Finally Japan agreed not to let any more of her citizens come to the United States. Japanese children born in this country, however, were American citizens and went to American schools. But they were called Nisei, and many felt like "second-class" citizens. In 1941, Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor. All Japanese-Americans were under suspicion. Our government decided to move them from their homes and jobs on the West Coast to inland camps, even though many had become American soldiers and were fighting bravely for this country. After the war. many families returned to the West Coast. It is to their credit that they have re-entered American life and made many contributions. 12. Some people began to say that too many immigrants were coming to the United States. It was said by some that these people did not want to learn American ways. There were American workers who said that the immigrants worked for less money and took jobs away from those who had been in this country longer. Starting in the 1880's, Congress passed laws to discourage immigration. In 1882, Chinese were forbidden to enter the United States. Beginning in 1917, no one was allowed to enter the country who could not read or write. In 1924. Congress limited the number of immigrants to 150,000 a year. Congress also stated how many could come from each country, This is called the "quota system." There was no limit on the number of immigrants who could come from Canada or Latin America. A later law. in 1952. made few changes in earlier laws. Thus, fewer immigrants have been coming from Europe and more from Puerto Rico, Mexico and Canada. Many settle in the East or Southwest where they do factory or farm work. 13. Congress passed a new immigration law in 1965. After more than 40 years. Congress ended the "quota system." The new law will permit about 300,000 people to come to the United States each year—about 170.000 persons from countries outside the Western Hemisphere and 120.000 from countries in the Western Hemisphere. This is the first time a limit has been placed on these countries. Under this law, newcomers are being admitted in the order in which they come to our lands, without regard to the places where they were born. Tell whether these statements are true or false. The underlined words make the statement true or false. If the statement is false, what words would you place in the statement to make it true? 1. Thomas Edison was born in Ohio. 2. Edison was interested in making money at an early age. 3. Edison's inventions led to new industries. 4. The most famous of Edison's inventions was the phonograph. 5. Asa young man, Edison worked in the rubber factories of Ohio. 6. Edison wanted to find ways to make his inventions cheap and useful. 7. Edison built a laboratory where he could work alone. I. Which of these facts may be found in a. The years when immigration was heaviest. b. How the immigrants became Americans. c. The meaning of the "quota system." d. The contributions of the Spanish to American life. e. Why so many people came to the United States. a. Why did people come to America between 1840 and 1850? b. What problems did the newcomers face in America? c. How did Negroes first come to America? d. What steps does the immigrant take to become a citizen? e. What is meant by "new immigration"? III. What is the main idea of Chapter 8? a. To describe the people who came to America from other lands. b. To describe how other Americans felt about the immigrants. c. To describe the jobs found by immigrants. d. To describe the problems faced by immigrants. IV. Ktiowing Why Choose the item or items that best complete the statement. 1. Why did the United States encourage immigration from 1870 to 1890? a. More soldiers were needed in the growing army and navy. b. Workers were needed in the factories. c. It was necessary to settle the land in the West. 2. Why did Congress decide to limit immigration? a. Indians protested about the loss of their land. b. The countries of Europe did not want to see so many people leave for America. c. Some people thought the immigrant took jobs from those who had been in this country for a longer time. 3. Why did immigrants settle near earlier immigrants from their own country? a. They shared the same language and customs. b. They were not allowed to settle anywhere else. c. The earlier immigrants had become citizens. 4. Newcomers to America were faced with which of these problems? a. They had little knowledge of English. b. They were not allowed to attend American schools. c. They were not allowed to attend church with English-speaking people. 5. Some American workers did not like the great 328 immigration because the new Americans: a. could not read or write. b. were often willing to work for low wages. c. were skilled workers. V. Do You Agree or Disagree? Give the reasons for your answers. 1. Most Americans felt that the newer immigrants could easily be Americanized. 2. Immigrants brought with them their ways of life from their former countries. 3. After 1890, most of the immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe. 4. The United States did little to limit the number of immigrants because Congress had no power to pass such laws. 5. The "quota system" encourages more people to come to the United States. 6. The leaders of industry welcomed the great numbers of immigrants to this country. 7. The newcomers often had the most disagreeable jobs. DEVELOPING IDEAS AND SKILLS 4. About 100,000 immigrants came to America each year from 1920 to 1930. 5. This graph tells us why immigrants come to America. 6. This graph tells us why so few immigrants came to America between 1930 and 1950. 7. This graph tells us from which part of Europe immigrants come. 8. People from Asia and Africa cannot come into the United States. 9. Fewer immigrants arc now coming from Europe and more from Canada and Latin America. 10. The years from 1920 to 1930 were the years of the heaviest immigration. 11. This graph tells us who makes the immigration laws for our country. Contributions of Immigrant People The people listed below are immigrants. Do you know the contributions of these people to the United States and the world? 1. There were no immigrants to the United States before 1900. 2. Most of the immigrants came from Europe between 1900 and 1920. 3. There were still many immigrants coming to the United States in 1965. To learn of the problems created by many people crowded together in a small area. 1. As more machinery was used. America became a land of cities. The factories were in the cities. Workers were needed in the factories. When farmers began to use machinery, fewer workers were needed on farms. They moved to the cities looking for work. A large number of immigrants also settled in the cities. In 1X00, there were only five large cities in the country. By 1900. there were 77 cities with more than 50.000 people. The crowded cities brought many new problems. 2. In the villages the people got their water from wells. Their garbage was burned or taken away by themselves or a small company. In the city, huge tubes, or aqueducts, had to be built to bring I rcsh water from lakes and rivers. Pipes were laid to carry away water and waste. The city collected the garbage and built large furnaces to burn it. 3. When communities were small, fire fighting was done by volunteers. The large cities hired firemen to stay on duty at all hours. These firemen stayed at stations, ready to answer any alarm. In the station was the fire wagon pulled by horses. A steam engine was used to pump water on the fires. The fire alarm box came into use. I. Many city people lived far from their place of work. They had to go to work in all kinds of weather. It was necessary to find better ways for people to travel to and from their work. Although some streets had been paved with cobblestones or wood blocks, others were not paved at all. But about 1900, asphalt streets began to replace cobblestones. Electric trolley cars appeared. Bridges were built across waterways that divided large cities. The first elevated railway was opened in New York City in 1867. In 1904. New York also opened the first subway, or trains that ran underground. 5. Living conditions for city people improved a great deal. About the year 1900, many city homes had built-in bathtubs, hot and cold running water, electric lights and even telephones. The rooms were warmed with steam or hot water radiators. The floors were covered with rugs or carpets. Shopping was done in large general stores called department stores. Here the city dweller could find almost anything he needed. The chain store began. These stores were able to sell goods at lower prices because they bought goods in large amounts. The Great A & P Company and the Woolworth Company were two of the earliest chain stores. The housewife was helped by the factory. The sewing of clothing, canning of food, baking of cakes and washing of clothes, once done at home, were now done by large plants. 7. As more people came to the cities, new schools had to be built. More people remained in school through the higher grades. School buildings were larger and cleaner. Teachers were better trained and used many kinds of materials to interest pupils. Some schools began to teach trades to the children of the cities. 8. With both farm workers and people from foreign lands moving into the cities, many sections of the city became heavily crowded. Most of these city workers earned low wages because they were not skilled in a trade. There were no new homes for these people. Families crowded together in old buildings. Conditions in some sections of our large cities were miserable. These areas were called "slums." Several families might live in a single "fiat" or apartment. Many rooms had no windows. All of the families on a floor might have but one bathroom to be shared by all. 9- In 1891, a Danish immigrant, Jacob Riis, described the conditions in his book. How the Other Half Lives. He pointed out that disease spreads quickly when large numbers of people are crowded together. He said that young people could not be healthy and happy in such conditions. Some of them would turn to lives of crime In the slums there are more fires and accidents than in other parts of the city. All the people of the city pay for these conditions because more fire and police protection are needed. 10. There were citizens in the large cities who devoted themselves to improving the lives of the people in crowded areas. One of the most famous of these social workers was Jane Addams of Chicago. Jane Addams opened Hull House in the slums of her city. She and her helpers taught classes in cooking and sewing. She started a day nursery for children whose mothers worked. Clubs and playgrounds were opened for the young people of the neighborhood. This kind of center is called a settlement house. The success of Jane Addams encouraged other social workers to open settlement houses for those who live in the poorest sections of our cities. 11- The new immigrants also learned to help themselves. Among these were the Jews. Through the efforts of such persons as Lillian Wald, Henrietta Szold and Louis Brandeis, they built their own settlement houses, hospitals, schools, old-age homes and other self-help organizations. They joined the growing labor unions in New York City to get better working conditions in the many workshops there. Many of the programs which now help people in need can be traced to these earlier efforts. 