And what was true of women on the frontier was true throughout the colonies. They had more freedom of action and more chance to take part in life outside the home than in England. Colonial laws gave them more protection. In England, for instance, the common law allowed a husband to beat his wife with any "reasonable instrument"; according to Massachusetts law, he could beat her only in self- defense. Widespread home manufacturing allowed wives as well as their husbands to learn trades. In the South the mistress of a plantation was a full partner in directing the working force. When seafaring New England husbands left their wives, sometimes for years at a time, women were successful as merchants or storekeepers. Still other women were printers, newspaper publishers, druggists, and doctors. Widespread Prosperity During the first half century or so of colonization, life in English America was hard. A high proportion of those who sailed for these shores died within the first year because of the hardships of the voyage. Settlements were prey to Indian attacks, to starvation from crop failures, to disastrous fires, and to epidemics of smallpox, dysentery, malaria, diphtheria, and yellow fever. By the eighteenth century, conditions were much improved. Epidemics were still common and human life was therefore uncertain, but this was also true in Europe. There was widespread prosperity—a product of cheap land, a ready market for colonial exports, and hard work. Idleness was generally regarded as a sin akin to drunkenness or gluttony. There were no beggars and few paupers. Organized crime was almost unknown, except for occasional piracy on the high seas and banditry on the frontier. It was a society of mixed origins. At first most of the settlers, except for the Dutch and the Negroes, came from England. From about the time of the founding of Pennsylvania in 1681, American prosperity began to attract people of different nationalities and religions— Scots, Irishmen, Huguenots, Jews, and Germans. Just as there was no class of beggars at the bottom, there was no class of idle rich at the top. Even the wealthiest men, whether New England merchants, Hudson Valley patroons, or Virginia plantation owners, habitually arose at dawn and worked until dark. By the eighteenth century the people of the thirteen colonies were beginning to call themselves "Americans" and to think of themselves as a breed apart, free of the constraints and corruptions of Europe. This view was sometimes confirmed by the observations of visitors to these shores. The most notable of these was a young French nobleman, Michel Guillaume Jean de Crevecoeur, who came here in 1759 and eventually bought a farm of his own. In 1782 he published a book on life in America, entitled Letters from an American Farmer. When a European comes to America, he wrote, "a modem society offers itself to his contemplation." Here are no great lords with everything and a horde of common people with nothing. Here are no kings, no courts, no luxuries, and—no poverty. Instead, "a people of cultivators" work for themselves; all can afford enough food, "a dry and comfortable habitation," and clothes of "neat homespun." "The American, this new man," as Crevecoeur called him, might have an English grandfather, a Dutch wife, and a French daughter-in-law. "Here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men," wrote Crevecoeur, "whose labor and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world." History, it has often been remarked, is but a fable agreed upon. In American history, a generally accepted part of the fable has been that 1815 marked a turning point. But what, it may be asked, was so special about the year 1815' Did Americans suddenly and collectively turn their backs on Europe? Were they ever in fact "free of foreign entanglements"? Were they not still part of an Atlantic community being drawn ever closer together as steamships replaced sailing ships, as wheat from the Dakotas and pork from Indiana began to feed Liverpool and London, and as an ever-increasing flood of European immigrants poured into American ports? And yet the fable that a great change had started in 1815 was itself a fact Americans thought they were isolated from Europe; indeed, they congratulated themselves upon it. The millions of immigrants seeking a new life in America often strengthened American isolationism because they sought to escape from their past. It took two world wars in the twentieth century to shock Americans out ol the belief that with the close of the Napoleonic Wars the United States had no further need to concern itself with European politics. Or consider the myth that men make history while women wash the dishes. History books have so consistently left half the human race out of account that Henry Adams remarked, "History is useful to the historian by teaching him his ignorance of women." The very word "pioneer" conjures up the picture of a man in coonskin cap and leather jacket armed with a rifle. But as you trace the march of the frontier from the Appalachians to the Pacific, remember that there were women pioneers too. Left to himself, the man on the frontier often went savage—witness his treatment of the Indians. It was the women who turned cabins into homesteads, planted flowers outside the doors, and put curtains in the windows. It was usually the mothers and schoolteachers who transmitted to the next generation the heritage of the past. It was, nevertheless, a man's world insofar as men could make it so. By law the husband legally ruled the wife. Rigid taboos dictated women's clothing ana freedom of action. Small wonder, then, that some brave women demanded equi rights with men and started a revolution that continues to the present (see p. 282). The embattled feminists who met at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848 appealed lo the principles and used the phrases of 1776. Thus, each generation must find ne" uses for the Declaration of Independence, or it too could become a fable. Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers ... The year 1815 saw the beginning of a century of peace in Europe that lasted with few interruptions until the outbreak of World War 11 in 1914. For nearly a century no warring nations preyed on the foreign commerce of the United States or violated our neutral rights. Apparently free of foreign entanglements, Americans turned their backs on Europe. "The continent lay before them," wrote the historian plenty Adams, "like an uncovered ore-bed." The quest of the continent was for the most part a matter of military force, although it in- us in numerous Indian wars and a war Mexico. Instead, it was a struggle between and their environment—the conquest of forests by the axe, of the prairies, of vast distances by canals, steamboats, railroads. Lured by the promise of a better millions of Europeans came to America, within America the people were on the fe. Helping to promote these developments came the greatest technological change in the history of mankind—the industrial revolution. The expansion of the United States created political problems, of which the most obvious was that of holding the Union together. In all history such a huge area as the United States had seldom been ruled effectively by a single government—never by a government of the people. The survival of the United States as one country was a product of many forces. The Americans were fortunate to inherit a common language and common institutions. The territory they inhabited was immense, but at least from the Atlantic coast to the Rocky Mountains it is one of the most unified geographical areas in the world. Much of it lies within the flat watershed of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, the world's largest river system. In the area east of the Rockies, the Appalachians are the only mountain barrier, and they are far easier to penetrate than European ranges such as the Alps, the Pyrenees, or the Carpathians. By 1815 the economic unity of the United States was not far advanced. Most Americans traded with people of their own localities or with foreign nations. But during the nineteenth century, various developments growing out of the industrial revolution tended to tie the United States together economically. As manufacturing cities grew, they had to find both markets and sources of raw materials throughout the country, and a great web of transportation was developed to carry goods back and forth. The most important binding force of all was the development of American nationalism. Nationalism has been one of the powerful forces in the modem world. At the time of the French Revolution, it inspired the French not only to resist foreign invaders, but to embark on a career of conquest that subsided only when Napoleon lost an army in the snows of Russia in 1812. In the nineteenth century, it was the spirit that turned Germany and Italy from geographical expressions into nations. In the twentieth century, nationalism has inspired scores of colonies to break the bonds of imperialism and to declare their independence. Nationalism is not easy to define, because it is a complex matter and its characteristics vary from country to country. More a matter of emotion than of reason, it is a compound of beliefs, loyalties, and traditions. It expresses itself in literature and song, as well as in symbols such as the Statue of Liberty' and the Stars and Stripes. It expresses itself in action: 'To have done great things in the past and to wish to do more of them are the essential conditions of being a people." Nationalism in the United States is bound up with the belief expressed in the Declaration of Independence that men can create for themselves a great society based on freedom, equality, and human brotherhood The "Era of Good Feelings" The War of 1812 provided a stimulus to American nationalism. It revealed the dangers of disunion and at the same time promoted a sense of self-confidence and pride. Albert Gallatin, a former member of Jefferson's cabinet who had been one of the commissioners at the Ghent peace conference, described the new spirit in a letter written only a few months after the close of hostilities: The war had renewed & reinstated the National feelings & character, which the Revolution had given, & which were daily lessened. The people.., are more American: they feel & act more as a Nation, and I hope that the permanency of the Union is thereby better secured. For four or five years after the Treaty of Ghent, national sentiment was so much stronger than before that the period is commonly called the "Era of Good Feelings." The leaders of the Federalist party had never overcome their scorn for the mass of people, and the people in turn were less and less disposed to choose Federalists for public office. Now the parti' was so discredited by its connection with the New England secession movement that it disappeared from the national scene. In 1816 James Monroe, Republican candidate for President, was elected over Rufus King, his Federalist opponent, by 183 votes to 34. In 1826 Monroe was re-elected with only one opposing vote, since there was no longer a Federalist candidate in the field. "The demon of party for a time departed," said a newspaper of the period, "and gave place to a general outburst of national feeling." One of the necessities for the take-off into sustained industrial growth is a mobile labor supply, free of attachments to long traditions of social organization or of craftsmanship, and willing to move from place to place. Many Americans had these qualities, and their numbers were supplemented by an increasing flood of immigrants. Until about 1800, immigrants to the United States were not numerous, averaging about 8,000 persons per year. But during the second quarter of the nineteenth century, a great migration began from Europe to America. Between 1840 and 1860 an average of over 200,000 immigrants reached our shores yearly; by the latter date, one out of every eight Americans was foreign-born. Reasons for Flood of Immigration Most of the immigrants fled poverty or oppression. In England and Germany the industrial revolution put thousands of skilled workers out of jobs. Rather than go into factories, Samuel Morse, Artist and Inventor On May 24, 1844, Samuel Finley Breese Morse sent a message over wires stretching 40 miles from Washington, D.C., to Baltimore. His words, "What hath God wrought!" proved to all that the telegraph was workable. The speed of communication leaped forward. One of the first important uses ol electricity, the telegraph introduced the electronic age. Morse, its inventor, was immensely honored in his day and earned a lasting place in history. Yet, untrained in science, often ignorant of the principles and theories of his field, he drew heavily on the work of others, sometimes without fitting acknowledgment. One of his biographers notes: "Morse was almost blissfully unaware of his own ignorance.... He lacked the mechanical skill to make his own materials with any professional finesse." It Is not hard to understand. Morse was trained in the fine arts. Born in 1791 in a Massachusetts parsonage, he early persuaded his father to send him to Europe to study painting. He wrote home that his ambition was "to rival the genius of a Raphael, a Michelangelo, or a Titian." He did, in fact, become a highly skilled artist, but the American public would buy only his portraits. They earned him some respect and a fair income, but Morse considered them mere "copying." Spectacularly improvident, he reluctantly took a job teaching sculpture and painting at New York University. There he abandoned brush and palette for batteries and magnets, turning his rooms into a maze of wires. From his experiments came the telegraph, and, with his life more than half over, he won success— m a field he never fully understood. In 1848—1849 there were unsuccessful revolutions in Europe, especially in the German states, followed by persecution of those believing in democracy. Many German liberals fled to this country. In Scandinavia and the Netherlands there was too little soil to support rapidly growing populations. In Ireland, the greatest source of immigrants, the native population was denied home rule, and a wretched system of landholding kept them in poverty. The staple diet of Irish peasants was potatoes. When the potato crop was blighted in 1845, there was appalling suffering. It has been estimated that one million out of eight million died of starvation; in the next ten years, another million came to America. Some immigrants actually came to this country against their will. The German city of Hamburg, for instance, found it cheaper to ship its paupers to the United States than to keep them in poorhouses or in jails. Public and private relief agencies in Britain provided money for the unemployed to take passage to America rather than go into the dreaded "work- houses," where poverty was treated as though it were a crime. Most immigrants came here, however, in high hopes of a better life. European agents of railroad companies and steamship lines described America as a land where riches could be had almost for the asking. Several states established immigration agencies to attract foreigners by such inducements as offering the right to vote to newcomers even before they became naturalized. But perhaps the most persuasive inducements to come to this country were the "America letters" written by recent immigrants to the folks back in their old homes. "The poorest families," wrote one correspondent, "adorn the tables three times a day like a wedding dinner—tea, coffee, beef, fowls, pies, eggs, pickles, good bread ... Say, is it so in England?" The letters praised not only the prosperity of America, but its freedom Here is a good opportuniiy to consider and equality. Here, they said, there were no class distinctions. No farmer had to tip his hat to the local squire, and workmen could leave jobs if they did not like the boss. Women were ! not expected to do heavy work in the fields. "If you wish to be happy and independent, then come here," wrote a German farmer from his new home in Missouri. Difficulties Faced by Immigrants The move to America was often difficult and dangerous. On the voyage over, immigrants were packed into the steerage under conditions little better than those on board the ships that brought slaves from Africa. It is estimated that nearly 10 per cent of the steerage passengers died on the way over from malnutrition and disease. Once off the boat, their troubles were not over. They might become the prey of swindlers selling bogus railroad tickets or "farms" that later turned out to be under water. So many people made a business of cheating recent arrivals that a Swedish minister remarked, "the American competes with the mosquitoes to bleed the emigrant." Even after they had found jobs and places to live, immigrants had to deal with the settled prejudices of native Americans. Some pious folk disapproved of the way German-Americans spent Sunday afternoons listening to band concerts. American laborers resented the Irish who were often so used to poverty that they could be hired for low wages. Employers were sometimes forced to put signs at factory gates, "No Irish need apply." Irishmen also faced religious prejudice so strong that it frequently broke out in mob violence. Immigrants met organized opposition from a nation-wide secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, founded in 1849. The * members of this organization were called "Know Nothings," because when asked about it they replied, "I know nothing." The Know Nothings the. motivations behind, hate movements, tried to keep recent immigrants from political. They demanded that immigration be reduced and that the naturalization period be increased to twenty-one years. The natural tendency of immigrants facing prejudice and grappling with the insecurity of a their environment was to draw together and to their old culture. This was reflected in appearance of foreign-language newspapers. New York City alone in 1851 there were such papers—four German, one French. Italian, and one Spanish. In spite of hardships, prejudice, and attempts cling to their old ways, most immigrants led themselves rapidly to America. Jobs abundant and land was cheap. Familiar tyranny and want, the recent arrivals often ted American freedom and well-being than did those whose ancestors had come here generations earlier. Immigrants made many valuable contributions to the arts in America: to journalism, to education, and to inventions The children of foreign-born parents were Americanized in the public schools, they were taught English and learned to along with children of different backgrounds upbringing from their own. There was one group of people in the North status resembled the immigrants in that faced prejudice and dislike, even though ancestors had been here for several generations: the Negroes. Although they had long been freed, northern Negroes were denied the right to vote and hold public Office, to enter the professions and skilled crafts, to send their children to any but segregated schools. They had to stand on the outside on streetcars and use only certain cars on d trains. Some states even forbade Ne- to enter their borders. Although some fought these restrictions and won a few local successes, especially in New England, northern Negroes on the eve of the Civil War were second-class citizens. By the 1850's, British textile machinery had become so efficient that it produced cloth cheap enough to be sold profitably to the poverty- stricken millions of Asia and Africa. The resulting demand for raw cotton brought prosperity to the deep South. In the decade of the 1850's cotton production broke all previous records. As new plantations were cleared in Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas, the yield rose from less than 2,000,000 bales in 1849 to 4,540,000 bales in 1859, Seven-eighths of the world's supply came from the United States, and raw cotton comprised three-fifths of the nation's exports. The 1850's also witnessed a revival of tobacco growing. This resulted from the discovery by Stephen, a Negro overseer in North Carolina, of a new method of curing that greatly improved the product. This "bright yellow" tobacco could be grown on lighter soils than had been worked formerly, and it was so much better that it sold for four times the former price. The result was a great increase in tobacco acreage. Because it devoted most of its capital and labor force to the growing of staples, the South did not experience the industrial take-off of the North. It was also out of step with the North in other ways. On three important issues—a protective tariff, internal improvements at federal expense, and the grant of free land to homesteaders—southern opinion was opposed to the dominant sentiment among Northerners. But what most set the South apart from the North—indeed, from most of the civilized world —was its "peculiar institution," Negro slavery. Technological problems vexed railroads from the beginning. Braking, slack control, and coupling (shown above) were a few of the many problems that had to be solved before railroads could fulfill their potential. and to speed transportation and communication. Among these were the telephone, new methods of steel production, and the use of electricity as a source of light and power. (2) Vast natural resources. The immense underground wealth of the United States had scarcely been touched. The country contained in fantastic abundance the raw materials upon which industry depended, such as coal, iron, petroleum, and copper. (3) Railroad building. By 1900 the railroad mileage of the United States was greater than that of all the rest of the world. Technical improvements enabled trains to carry bulky products long distances cheaply, thus making it possible for businessmen to sell their goods in a nation-wide market. (4) Abundant capital. The great profits to be obtained from manufacturing and transportation in the United States attracted investors. Much of the capital formerly invested in shipping was diverted to building factories and railroads. Billions of dollars came from abroad, especially from England. (5) A mobile labor supply. European capitalists often had difficulty recruiting labor for new industries because workingmen had been brought up to traditional occupations and hated I to leave their home villages. In the United States, labor was more mobile. The American tradition was to "keep moving." Laborers came to new jobs in new cities the way pioneers moved into new lands. Furthermore, the flood of immigration continued; the newcomers, already uprooted from their homes and traditions, supplied much of the "floating" labor force that industry demanded. The native American workers were noted for the ease with which they learned new' processes, and the immigrants such as English textile workers, Welsh miners, and Italian farmers often brought with them important skills. (6) Government policies. The Constitution gave American industrialists an advantage when it forbade the states to levy tariffs. This prohibition resulted in an immense home market-the largest free trade area in the world. Compare this with western Europe, where nearly twenty nations were levying tariffs on each others' goods. American capitalists demanded and received special favors from Congress. A high protective tariff encouraged "infant industries" and raised manufacturers' profits by keeping out foreign goods. Liberal immigration law's insured a steady supply of cheap labor. Tire federal government bore about a third of the cost of building the western railroads and sold public lands containing vast mineral wealth for a small proportion of their true value. (7) American institutions and attitudes. In Europe it was often difficult to change industrial methods because of continuing traditions of hand craftsmanship and the feeling that a son should follow his father's trade. But in America no such restraints existed; both laborer and industrialist felt free to abandon old techniques and try new ones. American law encouraged the formation of business corporations, and this form of ownership had a number of advantages over partnerships or individual proprietorships. It provided permanence of organization, so that its officers could plan far into the future. By selling bonds and stocks, a corporation could get the capital needed for its operations from the public at large, and small bits of capital could be pooled into large sums. Those with capital were attracted to corporate securities because by diversifying their investments they could spread their risks. Immigration Restriction Immigration in the decade before World War I averaged a million persons a year, and by 1914 over two-thirds of the immigrants were from southern and eastern Europe, reasons where living standards were low and opportunities for education were limited. The movement to restrict the "new immigration" was successful in pushing a literacy test through congress in 1917. The "new immigrants" were inclined to conjugate in cities, where there was the greatest nance for employment. They often formed compact communities of the same national origin, so that every great metropolis had a "little Italy, a "little Poland," a "little Greece," and so forth. This in turn gave rise to the charge that they were resistant to "Americanization." Rural and small-town Americans resented the new immigrants' increasing political power, which was expressed through the political machines of the big cities. They feared even more that the newcomers would overthrow traditional values. Conservative labor unions disliked the new immigrants because they threatened to lower wage scales. Employers, who had previously favored unrestricted immigration as a means of hiring cheap labor, now came to fear that the new immigrants brought with them the seeds of revolution. Crusade and Disillusion During and after World War I, feeling against "hyphenated-Americans" was stimulated by the anti-German hysteria, by the "red scare," and by a sinister "native American" organization, the Ku Klux Klan. When immigrants, to escape the hardships that the postwar European situation imposed on them, started to pour into the United States, Congress took quick action. In 1920 Woodrow Wilson vetoed a bill to restrict immigration, but in 1921 Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which cut the number admitted from any country in a single year to 3 per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. Three years later the Immigration Quota Law made restriction a permanent policy. This law of 1924 temporarily reduced the quota still further, setting it at 2 per cent of those resident in this country in 1890. It also provided that after 1927 the total number of immigrants admitted to the United States per year was to be 150,000, their nationalities apportioned on the basis of the census of 1920. This meant that over 85 per cent were to be admitted from northern and western Europe. The blatant racialism behind the law was further revealed when immigrants from Asia and Africa were either assigned very small quotas or barred entirely. A most unfortunate feature of the bill was total exclusion of Japanese immigration, even though the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907—1908 had been faithfully observed. Secretary of State Hughes wrote that Japanese exclusion undid all the good accomplished by the Washington Conference. The Japanese regarded the law as a national insult and the day it went into effect was a day of public mourning and humiliation. The incident discredited moderate Japanese politicians who sought cooperation with the United States and advanced the cause of reactionary militarists who were planning to assassinate their way to power and to embark on a path of conquest. Death of President Harding Those who had arranged Harding's nomination in 1920 neither expected nor desired him to be a strong President. He fulfilled their expectations. With his massive head and fine presence, he "looked like a President," and he genuinely wanted to do well. He lacked, however, sufficient knowledge, intellectual discipline, or will power to direct policies effectively Had he carried out his expressed intention of surrounding himself with the "best I minds," he might still have avoided failure. Some appointments were commendable, such as that of former President Taft as Chief Justice and future President Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. But other jobs went to incompetent or dishonest personal friends. Corruption was more widespread and on an even larger scale I than under Grant. The head of the Veterans I Bureau, for instance, arranged fraudulent contracts that cost the taxpayers an estimated 200 million dollars. The secretary of the interior eventually went to prison for secretly leasing to private interests oil lands reserved for the navy at Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, in return for bribes totaling over $300,000. When Harding began to loam what was going on, he complained privately that he had been betrayed. In the summer of 1923 he suddenly died in San Francisco, on his return from a trip to Alaska. Calvin Coolidge: Conservative When awakened to hear that Harding's death had made him President, Vice-President Coolidge was at his boyhood home in Vermont. He took the oath of office, administered by his father, in the flickering light of a kerosene lamp. This homely scene typified the relation of the new President to his time. Coolidge had many of the virtues associated with rural, small- town America. He was intensely conservative, cautious, given to few words. The great strain on local government caused bt the depression encouraged municipal reform. The 1930's saw a great expansion of the city-manager plan (see p. 531), which attempted to put local government into the hands of nonpolitical experts. New York City's vigorous little mayor, Fiorello H. LaGuardia, showed what could be done to free city government from corruption. Robert Moses, LaGuardia's park commissioner, made New York a better place to live in by building playgrounds, improving parks, and cleaning polluted waters. The prolonged depression apparently did not impede technological advance. During the 1930's commercial aviation came of age. By 1910, air lines were carrying millions of travelers and had extended their services to Europe and the Far East. Industrial laboratories continued to produce new wonders. The Du Pont Corporation easily weathered the depression by manufacturing two new materials—cellophane, which answered the need for a cheap, transparent, nonporous wrapping material; and nylon, a fabric that soon displaced silk. Amusements, the Arts In the field of amusement, the 1930's saw the universal introduction of the sound picture. Although Hollywood often presented a distorted or unreal picture of American life, there were more film plays of real merit than ever before. As a result of the inspired imagination of Walt Disney, the animated cartoon created a new world of fantasy, peopled with figures who gained world-wide affection—Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, and Pluto. The motion picture also gained as a means of education. Every month The March of Time produced a film presenting in dramatic form some important modem problem or development. The depression brought only a temporary halt to the expansion of radio, and by 1940 possession of radio sets was almost universal. This was one explanation of Roosevelt's success in winning support of the electorate when most of the press was against him. Since one of the major elements in production is keeping labor on the job, a National War Labor Board was set up, with powers similar to those of the War Labor Board of 1917. The work of the agency was made easier by the fact that after Pearl Harbor both the CIO and the AFL made a no-strike pledge. Although there were numerous small wildcat (unauthorized) strikes, and two major strikes of the coal workers, the no-strike pledge was on the whole well kept. Work stoppages amounted to a small fraction of one per cent of working time. In June 1941, Roosevelt reorganized the scientific research program by creating the Office of Scientific Research under the direction of Vannevar Bush. This organization had almost as much to do with winning the war as the army, navy, or air force. It developed radar controlled artillery, more accurate bornb sights, proximity fuse that immensely increased the effectiveness of antiaircraft fire, and the bazooka, with which infantrymen could knock out tanks, It helped to make jungles habitable by developing insect-destroying DDT, and to save lives through the use of penicillin and blood plasma. Attempts to Control Inflation The expansion of war industries caused a corresponding increase in employment. Individual take-home pay also increased, because the work week was longer and workers received time-and-a-half pay for hours worked overtime. Thus more people had more to spend. At the same time the shift of industries to war production reduced the availability of consumer goods. Runaway inflation threatened. The danger was [attacked in a variety of ways. Wages were | stabilized at an increase of about 15 per cent and rents were "frozen." An Office of Price Ad- [ministration (OPA) attempted to fix the prices of consumer goods and rationed products in * short supply, such as meat, sugar, gasoline, shoes, and canned goods. The federal government reduced civilian purchasing power by taxes on small incomes as well as large, taken directly out of payrolls. There was a determined effort to persuade people to buy war bonds, which would defer purchasing power until later. This many-sided attack on inflation was not completely successful, but it undoubtedly did immense good. The cost of living rose 29 per cent between 1939 and 1945 as compared with 63 per cent during the First World War (1914-1918). In the Second World War there was greater effort than in the first to limit profiteering. In addition to heavier corporation and excess profits taxes there were surtaxes on high incomes that reached the almost confiscatory figure of 94 per cent. Far more than the earlier "soak-the-rich" taxes, the war taxes tended to redistribute the wealth. Civil Liberties World War II did not inspire the enthusiasm or idealism of either the Civil War or World War I. The prevailing attitude was that beating the Axis was a dirty job that simply had to be done. There were few war songs, and none to compare with "John Brown's Body," "Dixie," or "Over There." At the same time there was little effective opposition to the war. There was on the whole less invasion of civil liberties during this war than in earlier ones. Conscientious objectors were treated leniently. The press and radio agreed to voluntary censorship and were in turn freed from much direct control. Government propaganda was on no such mammoth scale as in 1917—1918. But on one important occasion the rights of civilians were violated by the federal government on a scale never before seen. In the excitement following the attack on Pearl Harbor, over a hundred thousand Japanese-Americans, most of them citizens, were routed from their homes and herded into detention camps. It is estimated that they lost nearly half their property. That this forced "re- location" was unnecessary was revealed by the loyalty of Japanese-Americans in Hawaii during the war, as well as by the fine fighting record of Nisei (Japanese-American) troops. The Election of 1944 In spite of occasional dire predictions that once at war the United States would throw the Constitution overboard, elections were held as usual. The Republicans made heavy gains in the congressional elections of 1942, when the war was going badly. There were hopes, therefore, of a Republican victor)' in the presidential election of 1944. The Republican nominee was Thomas E. Dewey, governor of New York, who had achieved nation-wide fame as a district attorney prosecuting racketeers in New York City. The Democrats renominated Roosevelt for a fourth term. Dewey chose not to attack the New Deal. He was unable to criticize effectively the conduct of the war, since victory was in sight. He promised, however, to provide new and vigorous administration to replace the "tired old men" of the Democratic administration. The Democrats maintained that the great problems of war and peace must be kept in experienced hands. Once again the voters agreed with this argument. Although Dewey faired slightly better than Wilkie in 1940, Roosevelt again won the presidency by a wide margin. The problems faced by the United States in the field of foreign affairs in World War II all centered, naturally, on achieving victory over the Axis. As one historian has written, the aims of the United States were: ... to sustain and fortify the tottering British Empire; to keep alive the defeated French nation, almost inanimate under Hitler's heel but still alive and stirring in North Africa; to arm . . . the swarming Russian legions; and to prevent the remaining neutrals, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey, from falling prey to the enemy: in short, to win the war in Europe, then with Russia's hoped-for aid to knock out Japan in Asia: first VE Day, then VJ Day. Closely tied to the problems of fighting the war was the job of making arrangements for the peace which should follow. The Atlantic Charter, 1941 The most novel feature of the conduct of foreign affairs during World War 11 was the way heads of state journeyed vast distances, often by air, to confer in person. President Roosevelt, especially, liked to make direct confrontation with rulers of other states. He had a somewhat exaggerated belief in his ability to arrive at effective agreements through persuasiveness and charm, as he had dealt with congressmen or members of his cabinet. The first great meeting of heads of state occurred before American entrance into the war when, in August 1941, Roosevelt and Churchill met on shipboard off the coast of Newfoundland and jointly issued the Atlantic Charter. This was a statement of the "common principles" on which depended "hopes for a better future for the world." It was somewhat similar, in both intention and content, to Wilson's Fourteen Points. It looked to a world in which aggression should cease, in which peoples should have the right to choose their form of government, in which natural resources should be shared to provide a better life for all, and in which the burden and fear of armaments should be removed. It suggested, without specifying any of the details, a new world organization to keep the peace. The Eightieth Congress lowered wartime taxes, especially those that fell on large incomes. It passed a law to establish a commission to recommend methods of improving the efficiency of the executive departments. To emphasize the fact that this was a nonpartisan measure, Truman appointed former President Hoover as chairman of the commission. But Congress produced little other domestic legislation, for it found itself in a deadlock with President Truman. At various times the President proposed measures in the tradition of the New Deal, such as slum clearance and the expansion of social security coverage. All failed to win legislative support. Truman and Civil Rights Truman came from a former slave state, and members of his mother's family had been ardent Confederate sympathizers. But in his early political career he had fought the Ku Klux Klan, and as President he defended no cause more ardently than equal rights for Negroes. When Congress refused to pass legislation continuing the wartime Fair Employment Practices Commission, Truman resorted to executive action. In 1946 he appointed a fact-finding Commission During the panic days after Pearl Harbor, Japanese Americans on the West Coast were unfairly arrested and herded into concentration camps for fear that they would engage in sabotage and espionage. on Civil Rights; he told its members that he wanted to make the Bill of Rights apply equally to every American. In 1947 the Commission issued an eloquent report, To Secure These Rights, which made a number of recommendations designed "to guarantee the same rights to every person regardless of who he is, where he lives, or what his racial, religious or national origins are." The commission's recommendations extended beyond erasing discrimination against Negroes. It urged, for instance, that immigration quotas be abolished and that the West Coast Japanese-Americans who were deprived of freedom and property at the opening of World War II be repaid for their losses. In 1948 Truman, in his role as commander in chief, issued an order that there should be equality of opportunity and treatment for all members of the armed forces. The most important result of this was the rapid elimination of segregated units. By the time Truman left office in 1953, segregation had been abolished in the army, navy, and air force. For the first time in the history of America, large numbers of Negroes and whites lived together on a basis of equality. New Frontiers Another cluster of laws was designed to give direct assistance to the poor. A vast Anti-Poverty Program was undertaken, and its directing agency, the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), was empowered in some cases to overrule local governments that opposed its activities. The purpose was not simply to provide relief, but to help the poor to help themselves by fostering community spirit and cooperative action in fields as diverse as preschool training for children, cleaning up parks, and establishing playgrounds. After nearly twenty years of controversy, Congress finally passed a "Medicare" Act that provided people over sixty-five with hospital and nursing-home care, the cost to be paid for by higher social security taxes on payrolls. Medical centers were also to be established in areas where medical care was scarce. Medical schools were granted funds to increase enrollments and so avert a shortage of doctors. Rural poverty was attacked by the experimental Appalachia Program, designed to raise living standards in the Appalachian area. The continuing concern of the Johnson administration for civil rights was shown by a Law providing voting registration by federal agents in communities containing a high proportion of Negroes where less than 50 per cent of adults were on the voting rolls. New Immigration Policy For over forty years the immigration policy of the United States had discriminated in favor of people from northwestern Europe at the expense of all others. A system of national quotas was both unjust and ridiculous. Thus, out of a normal total of 157,000 immigrants admitted per year, Great Britain and Ireland together were allocated 83,000; but India, with a population of 450,000,000, and Andorra, with 6,400, each had the minimum quota of 100. Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy had all assailed the racist implications of the quota system, but without persuading Congress to end it. By the Immigration Act of 1965, national quotas were entirely abolished. The law established a "global" quota on a first-come, first-served basis. The only discrimination was in favor of men and women with special skills. Other Legislation Other legislation of the 89th Congress was designed to improve the environment in which Americans lived. A new Department of Housing and Urban Affairs was created, headed by Robert C. Weaver, the first Negro to sit in the cabinet. Plans were initiated to improve rail transportation in the great metropolitan area that extends from Washington to north of Boston. Wilderness areas were expanded and funds appropriated to end pollution of water and air. President Kennedy's assassination promoted new demands that Congress make improved provisions for presidential disability and succession. In the summer of 1965, therefore, both houses of Congress passed and submitted to the states a constitutional amendment that sets forth methods whereby the Vice-President may take over when the President is incapacitated and whereby a new Vice-President may be selected when a President is removed or resigns from office. In 1967, this became the Twenty- fifth Amendment. "Consensus" Lyndon Johnson owed some of his success as a legislative leader to his belief in "consensus," which in terms of practical politics meant something for everybody. Businessmen were pleased when Congress at his request abandoned excise taxes on hundreds of items like jewelry, TV sets, theater tickets. This tax cut, at a time when the economy was slackening Involvement in Vietnam During the Kennedy and Johnson years the situation in South Vietnam got steadily worse. Local guerilla fighters (the Viet Cong), with support from the Communist government of North Vietnam and arms supplied by Russia and China, carried on an increasingly successful civil war and came to control more and more of the countryside. The rapid succession of South Vietnamese governments that followed the overthrow and assassination of President Diem in 1963 received no great popular support, nor did they fight the Viet Cong effectively. The difficulties had been foreseen by Kennedy. As a senator, he had said in 1954: To pour money, material, and men into the jungles of Indochina would be dangerously futile and self-destructive ... I am frankly of the belief that no amount of American military assistance can conquer an enemy which is everywhere, and at the same time nowhere, an enemy of the people which has the sympathy and covert support of the people. Once in the White I rouse, Kennedy saw matters differently. Faced with withdrawing from Vietnam or increasing the American commitment, he did the latter, and every increase of commitment made it more difficult to withdraw. After Johnson came into office, the situation continued to deteriorate to such a degree that it became obvious that the United States must soon choose one of three unpleasant alternatives: carry on in a hopeless position and suffer eventual defeat, make a humiliating retreat, or carry the war to the north with danger of bringing in Red China. In August 1964, North Vietnamese torpedo boats had unsuccessfully attacked three United States destroyers in the Tonkin Gulf off the Vietnamese coast. Congress responded by passing, with only two dissenting votes, a resolution that authorized the President to use armed Three U.S. Marines carry a wounded fellow soldier from the ruins of HuO, South Vietnam. force to assist any nation in Southeast Asia that asked American assistance in defending its freedom. In February 1965, when the Viet Cong attacked an American air base in Vietnam, inflicting over a hundred casualties, Johnson decided to retaliate. He "escalated" the war by ordering the bornbing of North Vietnamese supply routes and military establishments. United States forces now abandoned their "advisory" role and actively entered the fighting. The position in which the United States now found itself was even more difficult than the one it had faced in Korea. There the fact of Communist aggression had been clear; the United States fought as the agent of the United Nations; and the South Koreans fought well to defend themselves. Now the United States was intervening in a civil war as well as resisting Communist aggression from outside; many non- Communist South Vietnamese were indifferent or hostile to the war effort; and the United States had military support only from South Korea, Thailand, Australia, and New Zealand. 