We are a nation of immigrants. The Indians whom the first white settlers found here had originally emigrated from Asia across the Bering Straits. In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, 35 million Europeans crossed the Atlantic to our shores while thousands of Chinese, Japanese, and other Asians entered our western ports. We sometimes forget, however, that two additional groups of Americans were also immigrants: Negro slaves from Africa and our pioneer ancestors who settled the colonies in the seventh and eighteenth centuries. With the exception of the American Indians who brought their own culture into an empty land, all these immigrants shared a common experience: They were uprooted from one way of life and forced to adopt another. The seventeenth-century farmer left the settled English countryside for the danger and opportunity of free land on the edge of a raw wilderness. The nineteenth-century peasant from Ireland or Italy left his familiar village for the strange streets of a vast new city. Today Americans migrate within our country. Thousands of people move each year from farms in the South to take factory jobs in Chicago, New York, Detroit, Los Angeles, or other large cities. The experience of growing up in one culture and moving to another ties us and millions of our ancestors together. Many of us have shared a similar uprooting experience. Few Americans are born and live and die beneath the same roof. W'e move from house to house, from city to city, and from state to state. Moving forces us to leave friends, churches, schools, and homes behind to make new lives somewhere else. In a way, we move from one culture to another, from one way of life to a second which is always somewhat different. Chapter 1 examines the role of migration in our own lives and in the lives of seventeenth-century colonists. Why do modern Americans move? What problems do they encounter when they migrate from place to place? Why did Europeans emigrate to the American colonies in the seventeenth century? Migration: A Class Survey We cannot clearly understand our ancestors unless we have shared their experience either in our own lives or through reading. Many of us have moved from one place to another. By examining that experience, we can learn something about how our ancestors must have felt when they faced the prospect of leaving their homes in Europe, Africa, or Asia and coming to the New World or leaving homes in one part of the New World for another. Many American students have never traced the history of their own families. They are often surprised to discover some of their own ancestors represented by statistics in their history books. Somewhere in the past of each of us is an immigrant from another land. Many of us are descended from people who moved from the farm to the city, from south to north or from east to west. Our past becomes more meaningful when we can place our own ancestors within it. This exercise is designed to help each of us locate our place in American history. It will also introduce us to some of the problems that the early settlers faced as they stood on the brink of the New World. Each student should talk to his parents as he fills out the questionnaire and thinks about the study questions that follow. Even your parents may not know the answers to many of these questions, but do the best you can with them. Write the answers on the copy of the questionnaire supplied by your teacher so that they can be collected and tabulated in class. Do not be concerned if you cannot answer all of the questions accurately. Many of us cannot. 1. If your family has ever moved, what reasons did you have for leaving one home for another? What did you sacrifice by migrating? 2. What problems come up when people move from one home to another, even in the same city? 3. Which would be more difficult, to move from south to north or from Europe to the United Slates? Why? Your Family in American History Under the mercantile system, colonies were urgently needed to provide the mother country with raw materials and also a market for finished products. Colonies also contributed to the mother country's military strength by supplying ships, naval bases, and men. Some colonists grumbled about the restrictions arising out of this system, especially if, as with tobacco, overproduction drove prices down on the English market. But often the restrictions were not rigidly enforced, and the colonists managed to evade them, either openly, by smuggling, or by bribing port officials. The Bonds of Society Immigration and the American environment brought, as we have seen, certain changes in the kind of life European people lived in the colonies. In England and the rest of Europe, wealth and hereditary' titles had created vast differences between the upper classes and the common people. The upper classes in Europe did not have to labor with their hands, but in America gentlemen often had to work hard to get a successful start or to survive. The availability of land—free or at low prices—-enabled relatively poor families to own farms and improve their positions. At the same time, wealthy men found it harder to keep laborers or tenants working on huge estates than they did in Europe. Independent fanning reduced sharply the social distance between the lower and upper classes and promoted social mobility, as John Pory pointed out in his letter. The shortage of labor, which lasted through the colonial era, and the cheapness of land benefited one group particularly. Because it was so hard to earn a living in England, many servants renewed their agreements which legally obliged them to obey their masters. Now they had an alternative; thousands of them—perhaps a majority of people who came to the southern and middle colonies—came as indentured servants and then chose freedom. Periods of service for adults lasted usually from four to seven years, or for children, until they became twenty-one. But masters competing for servants reduced the length of service. Because ex-servants could acquire land easily, they were reluctant to sign up for another term, even when offered increased privileges and rewards. Social mobility was, however, largely limited to Europeans. The same condition—shortage of labor—that offered opportunity to European laborers, denied opportunity to Negroes once the lifetime and hereditary slavery laws, such as those passed in Virginia, were enacted. The profits of farming, especially in the South with its longer growing season, were greater with slaves than with servants. White prejudice made the growth of rigid lifetime slavery. Persecutions of religious minorities and hard economic conditions contributed to the unrest that sent between one and two hundred thousand Germans to the British colonies. Many came as indentured servants, but some came in organized communities. They settled in large numbers in Pennsylvania, with its vast reserves of land suited to fanning and its tolerant religious policies. The Africans who came to America grew to constitute the largest non-English group in the colonies. Here economic opportunity played a cruel role; the booming economy and shortage of labor in the colonics made it profitable to import slaves. Until the late 1600's, there were many slaves in the West Indies, but few in the mainland colonies. When England gave the Royal African Company a monopoly of the slave trade to the colonies, the company brought more than 50,000 slaves to America between 16S0 and 16.88. During the 1700's, the slave trade, now open to all English or colonial merchants, reached such heights that by 1776 Negroes in the mainland colonies numbered half a million, one fifth of the population. More than nine tenths of the Africans and their descendants lived in the plantation colonies south of Pennsylvania. They outnumbered the whites in South Carolina and Virginia. While most colonists came from the British Isles, with those of English ancestry still in the majority, the immigration of the 1700's produced a population of which a large minority—perhaps a third —was non-British. Some effects of this new diversity were striking; many Cennan groups remained apart, speaking their own language, and Negroes, even when freed, were kept in an inferior position, either by law or by custom. But English remained the language of law, politics, higher education, and trade. The newer immigrants soon began the slow process of blending with the older. "We are a people of cultivators," wrote Crevecoeur in 1782. In 1750, this was even truer; more than ninety percent of the colonists made their living directly from the land by raising crops and animals, or by taking limber and other products from the still abundant forests of the coastal plains and hills. Yet their patterns of life—the ways they spent their hours at work, at worship, in politics, and at leisure —differed considerably from region to region. Many of the differences that set a Connecticut man apart from a Carolinian, or a New Yorker from a Virginian, had to do with their different economies. New England's hilly, rocky, and sandy lands discouraged the creation of large plantations. Small farms were the rule. At first the landholders of a New England town—the unit of local government—settled close together in villages, surrounded by. 2. What were the implications of the Virginia Resolution for the federal system? for freedom of speech in a democracy? 3. What does Hamilton's estimate of Jefferson suggest about the political position of each man? 4. Does Jefferson's inaugural address sound like the speech of a victorious candidate? What was the significance for the American political system of Jefferson's attitude in 1801? Sedition means the promotion of discontent with or rebellion against the government. The Sedition Act Congress passed an Alien Enemies Act (1798) giving the President power to expel from the country or arrest alien enemies during wartime. A Naturalization Act (1798) increased from five to fourteen years the time an alien had to live in the United States before qualifying for citizenship. If anyone writes, prints, speaks, or publishes, or knowingly assists in writing, printing, speaking, or publishing anything false, scandalous, and malicious against the United States government, either house of Congress, or the President, with the attempt to attack their reputations or to bring them into contempt or disrepute, or to stir up the hatred of the American people against them, such a person, if convicted, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars and by not more than two years imprisonment. If any person stirs up hatred against a member of Congress or the President, or promotes sedition within the United States, or organizes any unlawful groups to oppose or resist any law of the United States, or any act of the President, or to resist, oppose, or defeat any such law or act, or to aid, encourage or abet [help] any hostile designs of any foreign nations against the United States, their people or their government, such a person, if convicted, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars and by not more than two years imprisonment. The Virginia Resolution The state legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions protesting the Sedition Act and other restrictive laws. Portions of the Virginia Resolution, written by James Madison, are given here. The Virginia General Assembly deeply regrets that the Federal Government has made clear its intention to enlarge the powers given to it by the Constitution. Certain general phrases of the Constitution are being interpreted in such a way as to destroy the meaning of the enumerated powers which limit general grants of power. This tendency of the Federal Government to assume greater power will gradually consolidate the states into one political unit. This growing forth not to be considered as subject for future colonization by any European powers. This principle will apply with greatly increased force should any European power attempt to establish any new colony in North America. Existing rights of every European nation should be respected, but it is due alike to our safety and our interests that the efficient protection of our laws should be extended over our whole territorial limits, and that it should be distinctly announced to the world as our settled policy that no future European colony or dominion shall with our consent be planted or established on any part of the North American continent. Territorial expansion was one dimension of American growth. Economic expansion was another. The industrial revolution, which had begun at the end of the eighteenth century, increased at an accelerating rate during the first half of the nineteenth century. By 1859, the value of American industrial products exceeded the value of its agricultural products for the first time. Several factors contributed to the growth of industry' during this period. A vast natural resource base had always been present. Increasing immigration from Europe supplied labor for factories. American workers readily adopted new inventions and methods of doing work. Consequently, technological changes were put to practical use more rapidly in America than in Europe. Population growth and western expansion also helped create an expanding market for American manufactured goods. Capital came from accumulated savings, foreign investors, and government subsidies. Perhaps the transportation revolution was the greatest factor in the growth of industry. The turnpikes and canals built after the War of 1812 spurred economic growth in the 1820's by linking western farmers and merchants with manufacturers in the Northeast. In the decades that followed, western settlement, industrial growth, and the improvement of transportation facilities continued to be related closely. The most spectacular development was the building of the railroads. Railroad construction began in the United States about 1830; by 1840, the United States had 3328 miles of track, nearly double the mileage in all Europe. By 1860, this mileage had increased to over 30,000. The first selection in Reading 46 analyzes the significance of railroads to the American economy; the second relates improvements in thirty percent every ten years. Moreover, the American people were on the move. Their path to the West, that had begun in earnest after the War of 1812, continued. Settlers crossed the Appalachian Mountains in such large numbers that the West grew more rapidly than any other part of the country. In 1830, more than one fourth of the total American population lived west of the Appalachian Mountains; by 1840, almost one half lived in the West. But Americans moved not only to the western frontier; large numbers also moved to the urban frontier. Large cities sprang up in the North and West, Rural areas of New England lost population as a generation of young people abandoned the rocky soil of their parents' farms to seek new opportunities in New England manufacturing towns and cities. In addition to the American people who moved from cast to west and from country to city, substantial numbers of European immigrants arrived at American ports each year. During the 1830's only about 500,000 immigrants came to this country. During the 1840's this number tripled to over 1,500,000, and during the 1850's it climbed to about two and a half million. The great majority of the immigrants came from Ireland, a country which suffered from widespread poverty and a famine caused by failure of the potato crop, and from Germany, where in 1848 the attempt of liberals to unite the German states under a parliamentary system failed, thus creating many political refugees. Most of the Irish settled in cities on the eastern seaboard where the majority found employment as factory hands or as day laborers. Many Germans came from a middle- class background. Large numbers of them moved to the Midwest where they became farmers or merchants. American Ingenuity and Enterprise Population growth can weaken the economy of a country such as Ireland or India, that has limited natural and capital resources. In the United States with its vast resources, population growth spurred economic growth. More people worked to produce more goods for a constantly expanding domestic market. The Americans' attitude toward work also helped to stimulate economic growth. The zest and ambition with which the ordinary citizen approached his job, no matter what it was, invariably impressed European travelers who visited America. Americans placed a high value on hard work. The work ethic was partly an inheritance from Protestants like the Puritans who believed that God called every' person to his vocation, and therefore, all men should work hard in order to glorify God. The economic opportunities, which America offered poor people, reinforced this Puritan inheritance. As Figures are available for Massachusetts because it was the first state to establish a stale board of health (1869) which, among other tasks, kept such statistics. Part of the growth in population represents natural increase; the remainder stemmed from immigration. During these seventy years, more than 30 million immigrants entered the United States, largely from Europe. The labor of these new Americans contributed substantially to overall economic growth, particularly since most of them came as adults who had been educated through the unproductive years of childhood at Europe's expense. But during these same years, the gross national product increased from less than $9 billion to more than $100 billion, roughly eleven times. And during tills entire span of years, Americans continued to invest at a steady rate of about 12 percent of their gross national product each year. More and better education accounts for some of the growth. Individually and collectively, Americans made decisions to improve themselves as productive tools. Of the children between 5 and 17 years old in 1870, 57 percent were enrolled in public schools. In 1900, of the children in this age group 72.4 percent were enrolled; in 1920, 77.8 percent. These figures minimize the number of children in school because they do not include parochial schools which, although they were relatively few in 1870, absorbed a great many children into their classrooms after 1900. In 1870. 2 percent of the 17-year-olds in the United States had graduated from high school; in 1900, 6.4 percent were graduates; in 1920, this figure had leaped to 16.8 percent. In 1870, only 1.68 percent of students between 18 and 21 years of age were enrolled in institutions of higher education. By 1920, 8.09 percent were enrolled. Improved schools are only one dimension of investment in human resources which helps to explain the growth of the American economy. Training programs in business firms are another. Unfortunately we do not have good statistics about these training programs. They were probably increasing at least as rapidly as public expenditures upon schools. Indeed, they may have been rising at a faster rate. One of the reasons that businessmen in the late nineteenth century tended to support the development of public high schools was because they hoped that schools would take over some of the burdens of training the skilled workers that they needed. Improved health also raised the quality of the nation's human resources. The death rate of the American population remained stable between 1860 and 1900, that is, the number of people who died each year was relatively constant compared to total population. After 1900, however, the rate of death dropped rapidly, for two major reasons. First, infant mortality declined. For every 1000 children born in 1900, in the state of Massachusetts, 141 died. In 1920, only 78 died; in 1940, 34 died. The New Immigrants Between 1815 and 1920, roughly 35 million men, women, and children emigrated from Europe to the United States in search of homes, jobs, and freedom. Before about 1880, most immigrants came from western Europe, primarily from the British Isles, Scandinavia, and Germany. After 1880, an increasing number of immigrants left their homes in southern and eastern Europe—in Italy, the Austro- Hungarian Empire, and Poland—to begin the long and difficult journey to America. These new immigrants came from a part of the world that seemed both distant and unfamiliar to most Americans. Moreover, they came in greater numbers than any previous wave of newcomers. By the first two decades of the twentieth century, the number of immigrants arriving each year had more than doubled that of the biggest year preceding 18S0. Such a mass of people jammed together in cities would have presented enormous problems even if they had been much like the Americans among whom they settled. But they were not. They came from societies very different from the America of 1900. Their peasant backgrounds prepared them poorly for life in an urban, industrial environment. Their clothing, languages, and, in some instances, their religious beliefs and practices seemed strange—even threatening— to many native Americans. Chapter 18 examines the backgrounds of these immigrants, their difficulties in establishing new lives in America, and Americans' responses to them. How did the societies that the new immigrants left compare with the American society they entered? How did the move to a new society affect the immigrants' manner of living and working in America? How did Americans respond to the immigrants? Which one or which combination of the four social processes— extermination, accommodation, assimilation, or amalgamation—took place between the new immigrants and the native Americans? These are the major issues raised in Chapter 18. Large numbers of immigrants from southeastern Europe begin to emigrate to United States, Congress passes Chinese Exclusion Act and Federal Act excluding "undesirables" from entering United States. Knights of Labor succeed in forcing Congress to repeal Contract Labor Law of 1864, allowing employers to recruit laborers from Europe. Jane Addams founds Hull House in Chicago. Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives. More than 8,750,000 European immigrants enter United States. President Theodore Roosevelt arranges a "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan. Emily Balch publishes her study, Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. California tries to restrict Japanese land ownership. Congress passes bill imposing literacy test as basis for admission United States enters World War I. Canadian and Mexican immigration increases. Congress passes law restricting number of immigrants and setting quotas for each country. Congress passes a more restrictive quota law. Immigrants from eastern and southern Europe spoke so many unfamiliar languages that most Americans had difficulty learning about the lives and values of their new neighbors. They thought of the newcomers in simple, stereotyped terms: one nationality group had a hot temper, another was placid, another crafty, and so on. Those Americans' who reached out to the new immigrants found that such stereotyped, simple images did not fit the men and women they came to know. They failed to find a group of ignorant, dirty people bent on undermining American society. They found instead lonely, often confused, men and women clinging desperately to their own values and images of the good life. Many of the people who tried to reach the new immigrants worked in settlement houses—what we now call community centers—which were scattered through immigrant sections of many cities. Such houses flourished in the 1890's and in the first decades of the twentieth century. Unlike present-day centers staffed by professional social workers who frequently live outside the neighborhood, the settlement houses became temporary homes for middle-class residents who came both to learn about the immigrants and to help introduce them to American society. The residents of the settlement houses dealt, at least in theory-, with the people of the community as "neighbors," not as "clients" or "cases," as the modem social worker often does. A sense of religious mission inspired many of the first settlement workers who came from devout, Protestant families and who were In 1890, Jacob Riis. himself an immigrant, published How the Other Half Lives, a shocking description of slum life among New York City immigrants. Slavic peoples are those who speak any of the Slavic languages, such as those spoken in modem Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria. Yugoslavia, Poland, and parts of the The Austro-Hungarian Empire (1867-1914) included all ol present day Austria. Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, and parts of Romania, Yugoslavia, Poland, and Italy. often ministers themselves. A recent historian of the movement writes that for most of these settlement workers, "the decision to live in the slums was somehow related to the desire to apply the Christian idea of service to the new challenges and the new problems of the city." After 1900, graduate students in the social sciences, reformers, novelists, and journalists, in increasing numbers, filled the rooms in the settlement houses formerly occupied by ministers. All settlement workers shared a dual mission: to tell immigrants about American society' outside their neighborhood, and to tell other Americans about the immigrants. Unlike early reporters, such as Jacob Riis, who made judgments as they described life in the ghettos, the settlement investigators tried to cultivate an analytical objectivity', which they hoped would increase the effectiveness of their message. Reading 69 is drawn from the writings of one such investigator, Emily Green Raich, who studied Slavic immigrants. As you read, try to answer these questions: 1. What had been the peasant's traditional position in the social structure of the Austro-Hungarian Empire? 2. What changes took place during the nineteenth century in the old peasant economy? How did these changes affect the peasant's social status? 3. What relationship did Miss Balch see between economic and social changes in Europe and Slavic emigration? Bohemians were Slavic- speaking people who lived in Bohemia, a province of modern Czechoslovakia. Between 1848 and about 1860, many political refugees left Bohemia for the United States. Most of these immigrants were skilled craftsmen. The Slavic Homeland Emily Balch teas an associate professor of economics at Wellesley College at the time she wrote Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. In collecting data for the hook, she traveled extensively in Austria- Hungary, the area of Europe from which most Slavs emigrated. This reading contains selections from her work in which she explains the European background of the Slavic immigrants. One of the most important general facts about our Slavic immigrants is that apart from the early Bohemian movement they for the most part represent the peasant class. There is, I think, much misunderstanding in America as to what this means. A peasant seems to be understood as a synonym for a member of the lowest possible social class; a being devoid of all claims to respect who takes a great step up when he becomes a factory employee. Such views rest on a serious misconception. The peasant is a landholder, more nearly comparable to the American farmer than to any other class among us, and at home is far from being at the bottom of the social ladder. The old peasant life . . . which still largely subsists [exists now] in Austria and Hungary was once universal throughout feudal Europe, passing away in some countries earlier, in others later. In Austria, up to 18-18, medieval conditions were comparatively little changed. ... [Ljegal ownership of land was still vested in the lords or landed class; . . . The peasant holding involved very definite duties and rights. In return for his land the peasant had to do a certain amount of work for his lord, and these labor dues . . . were often very oppressive. In 1818 serfdom, in the sense in which it still existed, was abolished in Austria, and also in Hungary where the conditions had been similar to those in Austria. The peasant became a free peasant proprietor. . . . While it is nearly two generations since the old agrarian system, resting on an unfree peasant class, was legally abolished, its results are by no means a thing of the past. ... A peasant is then something quite distinct from anything that we know in America. On the one hand, he is a link in a chain of family inheritance and tradition that may run back for centuries, with a In 1848, mass uprisings broke out in France, Italy, Germany, and the Austrian Empire. The revolutionaries in these countries demanded constitutional governments, national independence and unification, and an end to serfdom. In 1781, Emperor Joseph II had abolished serfdom in Austria, but it continued in many provinces until 1848. A usurer is a person who lends money to others, usually at a high interest rate. name, a reputation, and a posterity. On the other hand, he is confessedly and consciously an inferior. It is part of his world that there should be a God in heaven, and masters ... on the earth. The typical village has one considerable gentleman's estate and a number of small properties. So the peasant takes off his cap to those dressed like gentlefolk, known or unknown. He bears himself toward them with an inherited respect. At the same time there is a sense of profound and hardly bridgeable difference between himself and gentlemen, a feeling which may be friendly, but is sometimes colored by distrust or intense antagonism. On the other hand, if the peasant has his superiors, lie also has recognized inferiors, and in many places three classes of them. First is the cottager or cottier, . . . the man who, with a house and bit of field, has yet no pretensions to getting his living off his land. Secondly, there are the day laborers, who often live in cottages belonging to their employer, and may be paid partly in cash, partly in kind [goods they produced]. Thirdly, there are the "farm servants," not servants in the American sense, but rather what we should call "farm hands." There are both men and girls, and are generally hired by the year, and boarded by their employer. You will often find peasants living so wretchedly that we should consider them on the brink of misery, who yet are worlds above their servants housed more like animals than people----- In his circumstances the peasant may be not only prosperous but rich—very rich. even, if one takes his way of living and aspirations into account. But he is more likely to be hard pressed with work, with care, perhaps with debt. His roof may leak, his meal [ground grain] chest show the bottom, his crop be sold to the usurer before it is sown,—he is still a property owner, a taxpayer, a permanent constituent of an old social order, known to and knowing all his associates, and enjoying a respect adjusted to his acres and family. The peasant is an entirely different type from the workingman. He has not the workingman's quickness, nor all that he has gained in intelligence and self-reliance through competition, frequent change of place, and the trituration [grind] of city and factory life. On the other hand, he has the conservatism, the solidity, the shrewdness, the self-respect that go with property, independence, and an assured social position. He is likely to be hard and niggardly [stingy]; this is perhaps the ugliest side. . . . Yet along with all this, and seemingly contradicting it, the Slavic peasant has created a world of fancy, of song, of tradition, a whole code of dress, manners, morals. . . . [The] old self-sufficient household economy was, however, gradually broken in upon from many sides as industry developed at the expense of agriculture. Even in places where no industry arose, the effect of that which was growing up in other countries, afar or nearby, made itself powerfully felt. As a "money economy," with purchase and sale, extended, the dependence on household production diminished. Money was needed for taxes. The obvious economy of cheap factory textiles, the superiority of iron pots to earthen ones, indeed the temptation of novel wares of various kinds at low prices, all made new demands for money. With these changes went a rise in standards of living; new' goods were available and new desires were contagious. At the same time with this rise in demands, growth of population without growth of industry made an increased pressure on the land. The old peasant economy had represented a fairly stable economic equilibrium [balance]. Population was kept more or less at a level by it, since only one son could take his father's place, and consequently it was difficult for more than one to establish a family, unless, indeed, he went away "to seek his fortune." It was the expectation that every thing should go on as it had done. That is the essence of custom, and the peasant world is the world of custom. The results of the breakup of the old system of landholding were often disastrous. The peasant being free to divide his land and feeling that his children all had equal claims, cut up land which was only sufficient to support one household among a number of descendants. The landholder unable to support himself from his own plot sought to eke out his living by working for wages in a population where few could afford to hire labor. In some districts debts, contracted under circumstances which put the borrower at the mercy of a creditor, worked havoc. Thus the peasant with mortgage payments which he could not meet or with children for whom he could not provide an adequate patrimony [inheritance], saw himself face to face with an intolerable decline of social status for himself or for his children; namely, reduction to the position of a propertyless day laborer. This is the sting which induces many a man among the Slovaks, the Poles, the Ruthenians, to fare over seas or to send out his son to the new land from which men come back with savings. While the grounds of emigration are in the main economic, it is a mistake to suppose that poverty is its cause in the sense that the greater the poverty' of a man or district, the greater the impulse to emigration. It is when the habitual balance of family budgets is disturbed that a sense of poverty' incites to emigration. The misadjustment may be due to a cutting down of income by some disaster, or it may be due to an increase of wants. The result is the same. And this awakening of new wants is a characteristic of our time, affecting one backward and lethargic [sluggish] region after another, it is extremely con- To encourage Europeans to emigrate, steamship companies advertised in Europe describing economic opportunities in the United States. Eventually, transportation agencies developed lo assist emigrants. Immigrants helped fill American industry's demand for cheap labor, steamship companies' increasingly competitive need for passengers, and the railroads' desires to sell land along government-granted rights of way. Emigration will then result if there is any opening which promises improved circumstances. Military service is another direct and continuing cause of emigration. Every man in Austria and Hungary, with certain exceptions, must sen e his three years, and he is forbidden to marry till after his liability to this service is past. Undoubtedly the interruption of work caused by the time in the army is in main' cases felt as a grievous burden, and many emigrate to escape it, . . . Another complicating cause is political unrest. Many of our Slavic immigrants come from groups which are more or less in the position of the underdog. ... I was told, for instance, that immigrants . . . who seem to have no economic reason for leaving home, when asked why they go, say,... "We go to see if there is still justice in the world." Generally, however, I think that the effect of such conditions is less to initiate emigration than to cause the emigrant who returns to his old home to feel himself a misfit there, and to decide to take up his permanent residence in America. Another "cause" of emigration is the advertising and solicitation of transportation agencies. My impression is that the less direct and concrete knowledge of the matter a man has, the more weight he lays on this factor. . . . The general causes at work are intensified at given places and at given times, by all sorts of occurrences. A flood, a conflagration [fire], a new American tariff, an outbreak of phylloxera [plant lice] in the vineyards, or a treaty admitting Italian wine at a lower rate—all these have been actual stimulants of Slavic inflow. As in any mass movement, the individual is more conscious of the purely personal and special motives which have moved him than of the general causes at work. Men emigrate to avoid family friction, to escape a scandal, to see new scenes, to join relatives, because others have gone, and for a thousand other unclassifiable reasons. Preserving and Changing New immigrants did not seek to change their way of life overnight. Some even planned to return to their native lands. As Emily Balch described in the previous reading, they had been caught in a conflict between old and new ways of life in their homelands. In the United States, they were caught in a similar and even greater dilemma. On the one hand, they had to find new homes, different kinds of jobs, and new patterns of behavior in an unfamiliar, urban environment. On the other hand, they had to find a meaning to life in terms of the values and customs of their native lands. The process of fitting into American society wrenched their lives. Many immigrants retained much of their old language, dress, behavior, values, and beliefs. At the beginning of the twentieth century, sympathetic observers, such as Emily Baleh, often spoke of the American "melting pot." They envisoned that in the future— how distant in the future they did not say—all Americans would appear to be very much alike and would share similar attitudes and values. Assimilation and amalgamation, they believed, would blur ethnic differences. Amalgamation may take place completely at some future date. Among the children, grandchildren, and even great-grandchildren of the immigrants of 1900, however, some differences still persist. In large American cities, ethnic neighborhoods, each with its own social and religious organizations, bear evidence that ethnic groups continue to be distinguished from one another. American politicians still recognize the importance of ethnic loyalties as they appeal consciously for the "Polish" vote, the "Jewish" vote, and the votes of other groups. Reading 70 describes the immigrants' dual process of reaching out for a new life in America while at the same time clinging to the old. As you read, try to answer these questions: 1. According to Miss Baleh, what were the most important ways in which new immigrants became Americans? 2. In what ways did immigrants try to retain their ethnic identities? 3. How did the author's own values influence her description of the process of change in the immigrant community? 4. In the process of change described, what balance was struck among 'accommodation, assimilation, and amalgamation? "What Are Americans?" Emily Baleh worked actively throughout her life to promote international understanding for which she received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1946. In this selection from her book Our Slavic Fellow Citizens she describes the immigrants' experiences in America. "My people do not live in America, they live underneath America. America goes on over their heads. America does not begin till a man is a workingman, till he is earning two dollars a day. A laborer cannot afford to be an American." These words, which were said to me by one of the wisest Slav leaders that I have ever met, have rung in my mind during all the Ethnic refers to a group of people related by race, language, or nationality, who share a common, distinctive culture, or tradition. Beginning at the bottom, "living not in America but underneath America," means living among the worst surroundings that the country has to show, worse, often, than the public would tolerate, except that "only foreigners" are affected. ... [C]oming to America they are cut off from the life of their old country, without getting into contact with the true life of their new home, from which they are shut off by language, by mutual prejudice, by divergent ideas. To them, both parents are dead, the fatherland that begot them and the foster-mother that supports without cherishing them. [Ijmport a . . , peasant into America. The courtesy which rested on acceptance of a fixed class station disappears as he realizes that he is not expected to regard himself as an inferior. On the other hand, he loses that standing which largely gave him his old form of self-respect and self-consciousness. . . . "Does the individual emigrant gain?" ... In the first place, emigration always involves pain; pain to those who go, and, above all, pain to those who are left behind.... [immigrants are inevitably to some extent exiles, separated from the old familiar scenes for which everyone sometimes yearns, and divided, even if the more immediate family' has all been brought together, from some of those near and dear to them. What it means to be in a country' where one cannot speak the language is, as many a traveler can testify, a feeling that must be experienced to be understood. . . . [A] sort of inhibition of all expression sets in; it seems as useless to gesticulate [gesture] or smile as to speak. It is almost as if one could not even think, so pervasive and numbing is tire sense that the channels of communication are blocked. I get the impression that the women are more apt to be homesick than the men. ... .As a matter of fact, I think the women both lose more and gain less by the change than the men. They do not like the iron stoves, which do not bake such sweet bread as their old ovens. They miss, I think, the variety of work, employment within doors alternating with field work . .. and most of all the familiar, sociable village life where everyone knows everyone else, and there are no uncomfortable superior Yankees to abash [embarrass] one, and where the children do not grow up to be alien and contemptuous. The men live more out in the world. They get more from America and perhaps had less to lose in the old conditions. In spite of the undemocratic treatment of immigrants which is too common in the United States, and which sometimes makes one's blood boil, they do get in America a sense of being more regarded, of being equals, that is new and dear to them. To the men it often means expansion. One of the most surprising facts in the life of Slavs in America is the degree to which they' are organized into societies. Many of their associations are small local affairs of the most various sorts. In a New York Bohemian paper I found a list of 95 local societies among this group of perhaps 35,000 people. Each of the main Slavic nationalities in the United States has one or more ... national societies, all apparently organized on much the same plan, with a central co-ordinating committee and numerous branches, founded primarily for the object of mutual insurance but also serving many other purposes, and with a membership defined by national or national-religious lines. When one considers the scattered groups of poor and ignorant immigrants, totally unused to organization and foreign to all ideas of parliamentary procedure, from which these societies must draw a large part of their membership it is remarkable how rapidly they have grown, how highly developed and successful they are. When men are scattered in a strange country, the "consciousness of kind" with fellow countrymen has a very special significance. . . . [T]o many an immigrant the idea of nationality first becomes real after he has left his native country; at home the contrast was between peasants as a class and landlords as a class. In America he finds a vast world of people, all speaking unintelligible tongues, and for the first time he has a vivid sense of oneness with those who speak his own language, whether here or at home. But it is not only common speech and ways, and in some cases common political aims, that draw the different groups of immigrants together, but also the sense of economic weakness. The especially dangerous character of the work in the mines and foundries which employ so many Slavs is calculated to enhance their appreciation of the advantages of mutual aid. Closely connected with the societies are the newspapers, which also have attained a surprising development here. Among the Slovaks, and perhaps among some other nationalities, the circulation of papers in their own language is greater in America than it Is at home. If the spontaneous and luxuriant growth of private organizations among the Slavs in America is a surprising fact, it can of course be no surprise that they organize, or are organized, for religious purposes in this country as in the old. A condition in America which doubtless strikes as strange all these newcomers equally, and which it takes them some time to understand, is the disassociation [separation] here of church and state.... Of course, the independence of church and state means to the newcomers the unaccustomed burden of building their own churches and meeting all the cost of maintaining their services. In general, these new demands seem to make for more devotion rather than for less, and it is astonishing to see the number and magnificence of the churches which these laborers have sown in so few years. In addition to church-related societies, immigrants organized a wide variety of associations, such as loan societies, cooperative stores, patriotic organizations associated with political activities in their native countries, educational and cultural societies, and insurance organizations. A foundry is a plant where molten metal Is cast or shaped in molds. Many immigrants, including the Slavs, came from countries in which the government gave financial support to the established religion. The recent Slavic immigrants, Poles and others, have . . . formed considerable colonies, and their hearts are set, with a strength of desire which we can hardly conceive, on having their children speak their own language as their proper tongue. ... I have heard of graduates of Polish schools in Chicago and Baltimore who do not understand English, I have been in a Polish "sisters' " school where the children were singing Polish songs. "We are little exiles; Far from our dear home We weep night and day " or something like that, the little round-cheeked boys just in from play on a Chicago sidewalk were chanting. A thousand more items to show the separateness of the foreign life in our midst might be piled together, and in the end they would all be as nothing against the irresistible influence through which it comes about that the immigrants find themselves the parents of American children. They are surprised, they are proud, they are scandalized, they are stricken to the heart with regret,—whatever their emotions they are powerless. The prestige of America and the hatred of children for being different from their playmates is something the parents cannot stand against. . . . With the acquisition of English the children are apt to lose their parents' language. Against this the parents strive. It is very common, for instance, for the parents to endeavor to have the children speak only the old language until they go to school, knowing that this is their one opportunity to acquire it, and foreseeing that after the children have entered school, they will speak English not only outside of the home but within it, too, so that it will be impossible to keep English from becoming also the family language. Henceforth the parents must talk with their own children in a foreign medium in which they are consciously at a disadvantage. . . . One of the great evils among the children of foreigners, as every one who knows them realizes. Is the disastrous gap between the older and the younger generation. Discipline, in this new freedom which both parents and children misunderstand, is almost impossible; besides which, the children, who have to act as interpreters for their parents and do business for them, are thrown into a position of unnatural importance, and feel only contempt for old-world ways, a feeling enhanced by the too common American attitude. One hears stories of Italian children refusing to reply to their mother if spoken to in Italian. One comes sometimes with a sense of shock to a realization of points of view strange to one's own. Take, for instance, a conversation that I once had with a Polish-American priest. I had said something about "Americans," that they were not apt to be interested in Polish history, or something of the sort. Instantly he was on fire. "You mean English-Americans," he said. "You English constantly speak as if you were the only Americans, or more Americans than others." I remarked that if I went to Poland he would not consider me a Pole. "No, that is different," was his reply. "America was empty, open to all comers alike. There is no reason for the English to usurp [seize] the name of American. They should be called Yankees if anything. That is the name of English-Americans. There is no such thing as an American nation. Poles form a nation, but the United States is a country, under one government, inhabited by representatives of different nations. . . . For myself, I do favor one language for the United States, either English or some other, to be used by everyone, but there is no reason why people should not also have another language; that is an advantage, for it opens more avenues to Europe and elsewhere." The attempts of the immigrants to preserve their old ways of life often led to unexpected adjustments to America. As they came together in their communities and through their social and religious organizations, they dropped much of their loyalty for their native villages. In its place, they developed a strong sense of national identity. In the old country, they had been accustomed to small organizations in their local communities. In America they learned to manage remarkably complex mutual-aid organizations with large amounts of capital, complicated accounting, officers, and elections. If the results of the immigrants' behavior were often unexpected, the same must be said of the American response to the immigrants. As Emily Balch emphasized, the child was the most important agent of change within the immigrant community'. He stood between two worlds—the old world of his parents and the new world of their adopted home. The public schools tried, sometimes gently, sometimes forcibly, to bring the immigrant child into the mainstream of American society. The schools taught him the English language and trained him for citizenship and loyalty to the American way of life. Not all Americans, however, were satisfied with the performance of the public schools. At the turn of the century'. Miss Jane Addams was undoubtedly the most respected settlement-house worker in the United States. She had helped found Hull House in Chicago and was an active participant in almost every major movement to benefit the disadvantaged and to promote international peace. The writer is dealing with two different meanings of "nation.'' According to the older meaning, a nation is a group of people with a common language and tradition, not necessarily organized in a political state. The more modem concept of nation is a politically united group under one government, which may contain several nations of the first type The United States is a nation of the second type. Like many other settlement workers. Miss Addams saw the school as a major institution for personal and community development. With considerable success, settlement workers campaigned actively for school improvements, such as hot lunches, school nurses, adult education, after-school playgrounds, kindergartens, and vocational training and guidance. They also wrestled, with less success, with the inadequacies of the educational program taught in the classroom. Schools, Jane Addams believed, tried to teach children American values, but the values taught were often not those intended. Reading 71 gives her criticism of the public schools and some of her suggestions for their reform. As you read, try to answer these questions: 1. What is the heart of Miss Addams's criticism of the schools she had visited? Does it make sense to you in terms of what you have learned about the new immigrants? 2. What were her ideas for reform? Do they seem reasonable? 3. On the basis of your own experience or from what you have read, does Miss Addams's criticism still apply to American education? If so, do you think her proposals would provide appropriate remedies? American Schools and the Immigrant Child Jane Aildams gave a speech to the National Education Association in 1897 in which she described the impact of the schools upon the immigrant children she knew in Chicago. I have had unusual opportunities for seeing the children of immigrants during and after the period of their short school life. These observations are confined to the children of the Italian colony hang directly east of Hull House, in the nineteenth ward of Chicago, although what is said concerning them might be applied, with certain modifications, to the children of Chicago's large Bohemian and Polish colonies. The members of the nineteenth ward Italian colony are largely from south Italy, Calabrian and Sicilian peasants, or Neapolitans, from the workingmen's quarters of that city. They have come to America with a distinct aim of earning money, and finding more room for the energies of themselves and their children. In almost all cases they mean to go back again, simply because their imaginations cannot picture a continuous life away from the old surroundings. Their experiences in Italy have been that of simple, out-door activity. and the ideas they have have come directly to them from their struggle with nature, such a hand-to-hand struggle as takes place when each man gets his living largely through his own cultivation of the soil, with tools simply fashioned by his own hands. The women, as in all primitive life, have had more diversified activities than the men. They have cooked, spun, and knitted, in addition to their almost equal work in the fields. The entire family has been upheaved, and is striving to adjust itself to its new surroundings. The men for the most part work on railroad extensions through the summer. The first effect of immigration upon the women is that of idleness. All of those outdoor and domestic activities, which she would naturally have handed on to her daughters, have slipped away from her. The domestic arts are gone, with all their absorbing interests for the children, their educational value and incentive to activity. The child of these families has little or no opportunity to use his energies in domestic manufacture, or, indeed, constructively, in any direction. No activity is supplied to take the place of that which, in Italy, he would naturally have found in his own home, and no new union is made for him with wholesome life. Italian parents count upon the fact that their children learn the English language and American customs before they themselves do. The children act not only as interpreters of the language about them, but as buffers between them and Chicago, and this results in a certain, almost pathetic dependence of the family upon the child. When a member of the family, therefore, first goes to school, the event is fraught with much significance to all the others. The family has no social life in any structural form, and can supply none to the child. If he receives it in the school, and gives it to his family, the school would thus become the connector with the society about them. Let us take one of these boys, w'ho has learned in his six or eight years to speak his native language, and to feel himself strongly identified with the fortunes of his family. Whatever interest has come to the minds of his ancestors has come through the use of their hands in the open air. Yet the first thing that the boy must do when he reaches school is to sit still, at least part of the time, and he must learn to listen to what is said to him, with all the perplexity of listening to a foreign tongue. The peasant child is perfectly indifferent to showing off and making a good recitation. I venture to assert that if the little Italian lad were supplied, then and there, with tangible and resistance-offering material upon which to exercise his muscle, he would go bravely to work. He would probably be ready later to use the symbols of letters and numbers to record and describe what he had done; and might even be encouraged to read to find out what other people had done. During warm weather, railroads hired gangs of Italian laborers from the cities to maintain tracks throughout the country. They lived in old box cars, cooked their own food, and were often gone from their families for months. Maria Montessori (1870— 1952), an Italian educator, developed what is now known as the Montessori method for the preschool child. Under this method, the child learns through discovery and freedom of action. The teacher acts as a supervisor and guide. Some states had passed laws regulating child labor. In 1916, Congress passed the Keating Owen Act which forbade interstate shipping of products from factories employing children under age 14 or from mines employing children under 16. The Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. Too often the teacher's notion of her duty is to transform the child into an American of a somewhat smug and comfortable type. She insists that the boy's powers must at once be developed in an abstract direction, quite ignoring the fact that his parents have had to do only with tangible things. She has little idea of the development of Italian life. Her outlook is national and not racial, and she fails, therefore, not only in knowledge of, but also in respect for, the child and his parents. She quite honestly estimates the child upon an American basis. The contempt for the experiences and languages of their parents which foreign children sometimes exhibit, and which is most damaging to their moral as well as intellectual life, is doubtless due in part to the overestimation which the school places upon speaking and reading in English. This cutting into his family loyalty takes away one of the most valuable traits of the Italian child. If we admit that in education it is necessary to begin with the experiences which the child already has, through his spontaneous and social activity, then the city street begins this education for him in a more natural way than does the school. Leaving the child who does not stay in school, let us now consider the child who does faithfully remain until he reaches the age of factors' work, which is, fortunately, in the most advanced of our factory states, fourteen years. Has anything been done up to this time, has even a beginning been made, to give him a consciousness of his social value? Has the outcome of the processes to which he has been subjected adapted him to deal more effectively and in a more vital manner with his present life? May we not charge it to the public school that it has given to this child no knowledge of the social meaning of his work? He finds himself in the drudgery of a factory, senselessly manipulating unrelated material, using his hands for unknown ends, and his head not at all. Owing to the fact that during his years in school he has used his head mostly, and his hands very little, nothing bewilders him so much as the suggestion that the school was intended as a preparation for his work in life. Foreign-born children have all the drudgery of learning to listen to, and read and write an alien tongue. Many never get beyond this first drudgery. I have interrogated [questioned] dozens of these children who have left school from the third, fourth, and fifth grades, and I have met very few who ever read for pleasure. From one point of view the school itself summarizes the competitive system of the factory. Certain standards are held up and worked for; and, even in the school, the child does little work with real joy and spontaneity. The pleasure which comes from creative effort, the thrill of production, is only occasional, and not the sustaining motive which keeps it going. The child in school often contracts the habit of expecting to do his work in certain hours, and to take his pleasure in certain other hours; quite in the same spirit as he later earns his money by ten hours of dull factory' work, and spends it in three hours of lurid and unprofitable pleasure in the evening. Both in the school and the factory, liis work has been dull and growing duller, and his pleasure must constantly grow more stimulating. Only occasionally has he had the real joy of doing a thing for its own sake. Those of us who are working to bring a fuller life to the industrial members of the community', who are looking forward to a time when work shall not be senseless drudgery, but shall contain some self- expression of the worker, sometimes feel the hopelessness of adding evening classes and social entertainments as a mere frill to a day filled with monotonous and deadening drudgery'. We sometimes feel that we have a right to expect more help from the public schools than they now give us. We have a curious notion, in spite of all our realism, that it is not possible for the mass of mankind to have interests and experiences of themselves which are worth anything. We transmit to the children of working people our own skepticism regarding the possibility of finding any joy or profit in their work. We practically encourage them to get out of it as soon as possible. 1 am quite sure that no one can possibly mistake this paper as a plea for trade schools, or as a desire to fit the boy for any given industry. Such a specializing would indeed be stupid when our industrial methods are developing and changing, almost day by day. But it does contend that life, as seen from the standpoint of the hardworker, should not be emptied of all social consciousness and value. The school could make the boy infinitely more flexible and alive than he is now to the materials and forces of nature which, in spite of all man's activities, are unchangeable. The isolation of the school from life—its failure to make life of more interest, and show it in its larger aspects—the mere equipping of the children with the tools of reading and writing, without giving them an absorbing interest concerning which they wish to read and write, certainly tends to defeat the very purpose of education. Miss Addams is referring to the effects of the division of tabor. Workers found they were repeatedly making one part, rather than an entire finished product in which they could take pride. Evening classes in subjects such as English, history, and government helped immigrants to adjust to life in America and also to prepare for their naturalization tests. In order to become citizens, immigrants had to read and write English and to demonstrate a knowledge of American history and government. Trade schools train students for a skilled trade, such as carpentry or mechanics. 72 Our Grandfathers Inside Us Ethnic background remains one of the most potent factors in American life. For many Americans, it continues to influence whom one marries, votes for, invites to dinner, or worships with. The hoped-for day when all Americans will amalgamate into one indistinguishable people, heralded in The American Farmer by Hector St. Jean de Crevecoeur in the 1780's and by another naturalized New Yorker, Israel Zangwill, in a play entitled The Melting Pot in 1907, has not yet come to pass. In the last half of the twentieth century', the American people seem to be dividing into four major groups: Catholics, Jews, white Protestants, and Negroes. The reasons for this development lie buried deep in the history' of the immigrants who have flocked to the "land of the dollar" from every nation. A median is a number exactly in the middle. In this case, it means that there were just a; many people under the age of 16 as there were people over the age of 16 In the United States in 1790. American Population Growth Before the Civil War, the population of the United States grew rapidly. Each year 103 Americans lived where only 100 had been twelve months before. Every twenty-five years the population doubled. This high growth rate is understandable. Since food was plentiful, Americans survived childhood better and lived a little longer than most Europeans. Moreover, because large families helped farmers wrestle with a shortage of labor, the birth rate remained high. After 1850, Americans stopped having as many babies as they had had previously. Large families were no longer so beneficial to parents, particularly in the cities. Farm children were easy to house and feed and did substantial amounts of work around the farm. But in the city, children crowded small apartments, strained their parents' slender incomes, and were seldom able to find useful work. Moreover, city children required many years of expensive education. The decline in the birth rate contributed to a slow but dramatic change in the age level of the American people. In 1790, the median age of white males was about 16 years. The median age rose steadily for the next century' and a half; by 1950, it had passed 30, almost double the 1790 figure. Many of the people in the 1950 total were the children and grandchildren of immigrants. The decline in the American birth rate increased the national shortage of labor and spurred demands for immigrants from abroad. Who came and from where depended upon several factors. A long- run change in the social and economic structure of Europe played the primary role. As Emily Balch noted, European agriculture and industry were being transformed. As farms were subdivided among several sons, holdings eventually became too small to support a man and his family. Sooner or later, he cut his ties to his peasant past to move to a nearby city' or even risk a new life abroad. At the same time, village artisans, forced to compete with machine-made products, eventually gave up the unequal struggle and shipped out for better economic opportunities in the New World. Emigration was cumulative. The daring souls who first braved the Atlantic crossing saved money and accumulated experience to help their more timid friends and relatives who followed. In addition, the spread of the railway network eastward into Europe made the land journey easier, and the development of better steamships decreased the hardships of the ocean voyage. By 1900, a steerage ticket cost from nine to fifteen dollars. Occasionally, religious persecution, a desire to escape military service, or a similar temporary event triggered emigration. Through the 1860's, these factors attracted immigrants primarily from England, Germany, and Ireland. Between 1847 and 1857, more than 200,000 immigrants landed each year, with a peak of over 100,000 in 1854. A second wave developed after the Civil War. Increasing numbers of Scandinavians joined the earlier groups, and in the 1880's people from southern and eastern Europe added to the influx. Annual immigration exceeded 400,000 for fifteen of the thirty- five years between 1865 and 1900. The 1900 census revealed that a third of the nation was either foreign born or the children of the foreign born. The third and largest wave of immigration came between 1901 and 1924. Table 1 presents the story' statistically. TABLE 1 The Source of European Immigration, 1861-1930 Period Total Immigrants Admitted Northern and Western Europe Southern and Eastern Europe Table 2 indicates that a shift also occurred in the source of immigrants from Asia and North America. TABLE 2 Immigrants from China, Japan, Canada, and Mexico, 1861—1930 Steerage passengers usually occupied the forward tower decks of a passenger ship where conditions were crowded and unsanitary. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1957. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1960. pp 56-58. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics, pp. 53- 59. The Chinese Exclusion Act also denied American citizenship to people born in China. Chinese students and other specific groups were, however, allowed to enter the United States. A total of 129,797 Japanese arrived in the United Slates between 1901 and 1910.In 1906, the San francisco School Board declared that Oriental students must attend segregated public schools. President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded the board to cancel this order. In a series of notes (1907-1908), he reached a "gentleman's agreement" with the Japanese government to stop the emigration of Japanese laborers lo the United States. Between 1854 and 1883, substantial numbers of Chinese came to the United States to seek better economic opportunities. In 1882, almost 40,000 Chinese entered the country, and many took jobs building railroads in the West. In 1882, Congress barred further immigration of Chinese for ten years. This prohibition was renewed each decade until the close of World War II. After 1883, Japanese began to emigrate in larger numbers. In order to prohibit Japanese immigration, the United States government, after considerable controversy and diplomatic negotiations, persuaded the government of Japan to prohibit the emigration of laborers to the United States. Both of these restrictive acts had been promoted by western states, particularly by labor unions in the West. They feared competition from Oriental workers and claimed that Chinese and Japanese were an alien race in a land peopled primarily by Caucasians. After 1900, both Canadians and Mexicans began to arrive in the United States in substantial numbers. In the decade after 1910, about one million English-speaking and 500,000 French-speaking Canadians crossed the border. This population traffic, however, went both ways. Between 1890 and 1914, almost a million Americans emigrated to Canada, particularly into the provinces bordering the states from Minnesota to Montana. In addition, the census revealed that in 1930 about 750,000 Mexicans lived in the United States, where they were concentrated in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California. Mexican immigrants were usually poor and illiterate. They worked primarily as farm laborers and became involved in difficult problems of labor and ethnic relations which have only begun to be resolved in our own day. The Characteristics of the Immigrants At the time of each immigrant's entry, officials asked him to state his occupation. Table 3 was compiled from immigrants' answers. As Emily Balch noted, many uprooted peasants had moved to cities in their native lands where they had taken jobs in industry before coming to the United States. How deeply this experience had penetrated, and how many people were accustomed to factory work before coming to the United States, we do not know. Nor do we know how the immigrants differed from those who stayed behind. More than sixty percent of the immigrants were males, and most were young adults. Hence most immigrants could work for many years, and few would have to be supported by others. Some scholars think that emigrants had in common a sense of adventure and were drawn from the most free and modem segments of the population. Nobody can be sure of this conclusion. Intensive comparison of a few areas in Italy, for example, suggests that immigrants came from traditional villages where ancient ways were firmly embedded. Adjusting to American Society Once within the United States, the changes in immigrants sketched by Emily Balch seem to have been almost universal. The experience of emigration weakened attachments to European villages or towns and increased identification with the national state. Groups whose life had focused around the family developed a wide range of formal organizations, such as mutual-benefit societies. A vigorous press grew up among peoples who had hardly seen a newspaper before. In every group children confronted parents with conflicts between old cultures and new. This experience was not quite the same for every immigrant group. For each it involved slightly different opportunities, choices, anti difficulties. The eastern Europeans, for example, included approximately the one and a half million Jews. Since Jews had l>een forbidden by law to own land in eastern Europe and had not been permitted to participate fully in society, they lived differently from eastern European peasants. Most of them earned their livings as artisans or merchants. They were accustomed to being treated as aliens in a strange and often hostile land. Jews placed a high premium on knowledge and achievement as measures of individual worth. In addition, their own traditional culture had been changing for several centuries. Young men had become excited by ideas of "enlightenment" and nationalism. Released from the constraints of the Russian, Polish, or Hungarian village when they emigrated to Vienna or New York, Jews moved rapidly into the mainstream of modem life. On the American side of the Atlantic, Jews quickly developed the sort of community institutions that Miss Balch described to give them mutual protection and help them accommodate to American society. They achieved unusual personal successes. By the first decade of the twentieth century, sons of Jewish immigrants who "Enlightenment" refers to a belief in progress, natural law and natural rights, and reason. Young enlightened men scorned tradition and believed that each generation would, by its endeavors, contribute a better life for the next generation. The years immediately following the French Revolution of 1789 were Known as the Age of Enlightenment. A Magyar is a person who speaks the main language of what is now Hungary. entered the United States in 1890 were protesting against discrimination in college admission procedures. This personal success had a twofold effect upon the institutions which first-generation immigrants had set up. On the one hand, successful men and women provided a large fund of capital and of trained personnel for community purposes. On the other hand, success by American standards challenged, more rapidly than in other groups, the adequacy of group identification and pride as a way of participating in American life. Jews have, at one and the same time, been vigorous spokesmen for "cultural pluralism"—the idea that there are many American cultures, each to be respected—and of full assimilation into America. Jews have not been entirely unique. The Oriental communities of the west coast showed many of the same traits of enterprise and emphasis upon achievement and intellectual accomplishment. Both Orientals and Jews met greater discrimination as they became more successful by American standards. For example, California tried to restrict Japanese land ownership at a time (1913) when Japanese immigrants threatened to take over large stretches of land, such as the San Joaquin Valley. And, like Jews, Orientals base contributed a disproportionately large number of intellectuals and professional people to the society. The differences which developed among immigrant groups between the early twentieth century and today did not grow exclusively from the values which immigrants brought with them to this country. Differences also stemmed from the American experience. Each group tended to cluster in a special set of industries or occupations. The initial concentration was in part accidental, depending upon the most active employers at the time when a particular immigrant group first entered the country. Later, clustering was not so accidental. The first entrants, with the support of their employers, encouraged their countrymen to move to the firm or industry with which they were familiar. The census of 1910 showed the effects of this clustering behavior. Though foreign-born males comprised only 20.5 percent of all male industrial workers, in twenty-three industries they formed between 40 and 76 percent of the work force. Several of these industries, particularly in indiv idual cities, were dominated by single groups such as Irish in construction, Jews in clothing manufacturing, and Slavs and Magyars in steel. The industry where members of an ethnic group first found employment strongly affected its future development. Groups working in industries with few highly paid jobs requiring education have shown relatively little social mobility. Industries that offered more opportunities for advancement helped immigrant groups who worked there to push up the social ladder. Behavior that people used to attribute to ethnic background appears on closer examination to have resulted from conditions in particular industries. When Italians took jobs in the textile industry, where they were largely unskilled or semi-skilled workers, union leaders argued that they could not be unionized. But Italians in the building trades, where it was relatively easy to organize because skilled workers there had more bargaining power, joined unions readily. In general, the ability to form unions and gain higher wages depended more on the amount of skill people needed than on ethnic background. Immigration Restriction The era of mass immigration closed during the 1920's. Since the first onset of heavy Irish immigration in the 1840's, "native" Americans had responded ambiguously to the newcomers. Some welcomed them. Others feared for American values and greeted the newcomers with hostility. In the 1840's and 1850's, this hostility, compounded with anti-Catholicism, was probably the most important political issue through most of the northeastern United States. Anti-Catholic riots broke out in most major cities and the Know-Nothing Party became a major political force. If there had been a public-opinion poll at the time, the number one issue on people's minds would probably have been "nativism" rather than slavery. Nativism did not die after the Civil War, though for a time other issues seemed more important. In the 1880's and l890's, however, three events helped it gain strength. The first was the increase in the proportion of eastern and southern European immigrants. Native- born Americans—whose ancestors came from northern and western Europe—claimed that the newcomers came from less desirable backgrounds. Second, the old immigrants were beginning to take part in American political life. Several eastern cities elected their first mayors of Irish descent. Germans insisted that public schools should teach German and that beer gardens should be allowed to remain open on Sunday. Many older groups resented the new power of recent immigrants. Third, the increasing economic growth and urbanization of the country, threatened the self-images and traditions of many people. The immigrants, so much a part of the new age, became scapegoats for the tensions it generated. This renewed nativism showed its first important fruits in the 1890's. Local communities throughout the country redoubled their efforts to make everyone more patriotic. They passed laws insisting upon English as the only language of instruction in the schools and prohibiting some of the "immoral" practices associated with immigrants, especially in matters, such as gambling and liquor sales, that conflicted with religious attitudes of native groups. Nativists also led a movement to restrict immigration. During the first three quarters of the nineteenth century, states that were the Since it is difficult to obtain good, skilled labor, skilled laborers are in better position to bargain with their employers than unskilled laborers. The Know-Nothing, or American, party began as a secret organization opposed to immigrants, particularly Catholics. With the disintegration of the established parties, the Know- Nothings won substantial victories in 1854 and elected several governors, state legislators, and representatives to Congress. In 1864, Congress had passed a Contract labor law which allowed employers to recruit laborers from Europe. Workers signed contracts agreeing to work (or one employer for a specified period of time for specified wages. Workers could not legally leave the job during the contract term. American laborers objected to the law, and Congress repealed it in 1885. The "literacy Test Act" required aliens over the age of 16 to read "not less than thirty nor more than eighty words in ordinary use" in either English or some other language. Since 1968. the United States admits 120,000 immigrants from the Western Hemisphere and, 170,000 from elsewhere each year. Preference is given to those who are scientists, professionals. or victims of political oppression, and to those having relatives in the United States. There are no longer any strict national quotas. ports-of-entry for a large number of immigrants had attempted through the police power to exclude diseased persons, paupers, and criminals. In 1882, Congress excluded convicts, idiots, and persons likely to become public charges, and imposed a head tax of fifty cents on each immigrant admitted. In a series of later acts. Congress excluded additional groups, increased the head tax, and forbade contract labor. These acts, based on the principle that the government should select the types of persons to be admitted, did not noticeably decrease the total flow of immigrants. A demand for stricter selection and for restricting the total to be admitted built up steadily, particularly among union members. A bill providing for a literacy test in any language as a basis of admission passed one house of Congress thirty-two times and on four occasions passed both houses, only to be vetoed by the President (Cleveland and Taft once each and Wilson twice). In 1917, however, the bill passed over Wilson's veto. In theory' selective, this act was in fact also restrictive because a large proportion of the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe could not read. Fearing a flood of immigrants in the years following World War I despite the literacy test. Congress passed another restrictive law in 1921 limiting annual immigration to 357,802 and setting a quota for each nation computed by taking 3 percent of the total number of persons of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. The quota favored northern and western Europe. In 1924, the law was toughened. It provided that after 1927 total immigration in any one year would be limited to 150,000. To make up this total, a quota was allocated to each country according to the proportion of its natives in the population of the United States in 1920. The quota allocated to each group had no relationship to the number of people who actually wanted to come to the United States. The quota for England, which was very large, was unused while the quotas for eastern and southern European nations were small in comparison to the number who wanted to emigrate. This quota system implied that the newer immigrants were less desirable than those from northern and western Europe. The Contributions of Immigrants Textbooks often contain long lists of immigrants who made important contributions to American society. The lists are usually filled with names of famous men and women: political leaders, authors, musicians, inventors, athletes, soldiers, and so forth. Without exception, every' immigrant group has distinguished candidates for such a list. But a list of people who became successful does not begin to indicate the major contributions of immigrants to American life. A walk through any major city offers far richer data. Look at the New York subways, built largely by the labor of Irish and Italians. Look at the restaurants, with food whose recipes came in the holds of ships from ports around the world. Observe the architecture, reminiscent of Europe, Asia, or the Middle East, of churches, stores, and houses. Enter the shops of importers who travel to their homelands each year to buy fresh stock. Watch the billboards advertising dance troupes and orchestras filled with foreign-born artists. Most of all, look at the people: brunettes, blondes, and redheads; skins from ebony to ivory; long faces and broad ones; five- footers next to men seven feet tall; eyes of every color; features of every' type. We are all immigrants and the offspring of immigrants, and we have all contributed to the infinite variety and richness of our nation. Many of the most important contributors have been unknown people who lived quiet, happy lives, doing an ordinary job well and raising a family. Most of the first generation of immigrants, like those described by Emily Balch, struggled to stay alive and to find a new meaning to life in a strange land. Partly because they clung to the ways of their homeland, many of their children scorned them and refused to speak their parents' language. But the third generation, secure in an America which was their home, often moved to the suburbs, learned their ancestral languages in high school or college, and asked their grandparents endless questions about their birthplaces and the long trip to the New World. As the readings in this chapter indicate, the struggle to survive was seldom easy'. This was no mean contribution: to raise children and grandchildren each proud in his own way of his nation and his heritage and each struggling successfully to find a place within both. The immigrants contributed to the social mobility which has characterized the United States. They usually entered the labor force at the bottom, taking the unskilled and semi-skilled jobs. This development often pushed older American groups up the economic ladder into skilled crafts and supervisory positions. More money and more responsibility often encouraged people to educate their children better, thus giving them even greater opportunities than their parents had for advancement. The immigrants actually created new and better jobs for native Americans, although thus phenomenon was not always obvious. Amalgamation, Accommodation, Assimilation No single pattern of adjustment emerged among American immigrants. The descendants of English, Scotch, Dutch, Scandinavian, and German immigrants who came to the New World in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centimes amalgamated to the point that distinguishable group fines largely disappeared. With these groups. the concept of the melting pot is valid. To a greater or lesser degree, all immigrant groups became partly assimilated. They adopted a common language, common clothing, common norms of behavior, and many other traits. But many groups came closer to accommodation than to assimilation. They retained exclusive social organizations, such as mutual aid societies, and separate religious congregations. Instead of amalgamating into one homogeneous people, modem Americans seem to have clustered into four major groups separated by religious and racial lines: Catholics, Jews, white Protestants, and Negroes. Marriage statistics indicate that, although numerous exceptions can be cited, members of each major religious group tend to marry within the group. Irish Catholics marry Italian Catholics much more than Catholics marry Protestants or Jews. One scholar called this development a "triple melting pot" characterized by religious affiliation. A fourth group, black Americans, makes the pot quadruple. Rather than give an ethnic identification, many modern Americans, when asked who or what they are, respond by giving their occupation, their religion, and their race. Strong feelings about religion and race do exist. Some Catholics, some Jews, some Protestants, and some Negroes would still be deeply distressed if one of their children married someone of another religious faith or race. But large numbers of people in all of these groups would not. Moreover, they are bound together with a common adherence to a democratic way of life. In the future, the dream of Crevecoeur and Zangwill, a French Catholic and a British Jew of Russian origins, may come true for us all—black, white, red, and yellow; Protestant, Catholic, Jew. Great Britain and Germany were two of the leading steel producing countries. Making iron was an important industry around Dublin, Ireland, and steelworks constituted a major part of the industrial wealth of Wales. Thus, these immigrants had the experience of working in the iron and steel industries. The Amalgamated Association of iron and Steel Workers had been organized in 1876 when three separate iron and steel unions united. Strikes are work stoppages called by unions either to try to force an employer to meet their demands or to protest against conditions imposed by an employer. Profit sharing is a system in which workers receive a share of the business profits in addition to their wages. Consolidation is the formation of a larger business from several smaller ones. which can readily be recruited either from other industries or from Europe by slightly increasing the rate of wages. Such a situation assured the skilled workmen a considerable degree of independence and of control over their working conditions. The introduction of mechanical processes has to a large degree displaced these men either both unskilled laborers or with semiskilled workmen who can be recruited by the thousands whenever it is necessary. Similarly, although in 1890 there was a large proportion of foreign-born employees in the industry, they were principally English, Irish, Welsh, and Germans, and were therefore largely familiar either with the iron and steel industry' or with some other industry organized along similar lines. At present more than half the working force of the industry is drawn from the farms of eastern and southern Europe, and is therefore accustomed to the position of tenant or farm laborer and unacquainted with the wage system of industry. Apart from the unwillingness of the English-speaking workmen to associate with these immigrant employees, the working force is at present divided into two groups which are unable to communicate except by signs or through an interpreter. In 1890, although there were a number of companies with comparatively large capital, the typical establishment was of small size and was owned by an individual or a partnership rather than by a corporation. The skilled workmen, on the other hand, were largely banded together in one strong organization, the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers, and so successful had it been in extending its influence and membership that many of the manufacturers expected that it would within a short time reach such a position that it would have to he dealt with by the manufacturers acting through some form of organization. It was suggested at this time that to avoid the losses from strikes and other labor disturbances, voluntary arbitration should be submitted to and some form of profit sharing generally introduced which would tend to identify more closely the interests of the skilled workmen with those of the manufacturers. The consolidation of manufacturing interests has been achieved to a degree which in 1890 was not believed to be possible. But instead of the strong organizations of workmen expected, the end of 20 years sees the employees not only without strong unions, hut completely unorganized in all except two minor branches of the industry, and even there the union is extremely weak. Not only is there no arbitration of questions involving wages and working conditions between two strongly organized parties to the dispute, but it is generally insisted that the employees shall accept whatever wages are offered without dispute or argument. Picketing Is the practice strikers use of stationing union members, who usually carry signs, around a struck firm to persuade workers or shoppers not to enter the building during a strike. Discriminating has several meanings. In this case It means "able to make careful distinctions based on good judgment." statements], were endless and monotonous; in most communities the only public official to appeal to turned out to be a mill official. Federal officials' active intervention concerned chiefly (1) the Department of Justice, and (2) the U. S. Army. Both cases contributed to steelworkers' beliefs about strike-breaking activities. The principal use of armed forces outside of Pennsylvania was at Gary, Indiana, occupied first by the state militia, then by the U. S. Army under General Leonard Wood. General Wood declared that "the army would be neutral." He established rules in regard to picketing. These rules were so interpreted and carried out as to result in breaking up the picket line. The picket line thus dwindled, and its disappearance signaled to the Can' workers that the strike was breaking. Army officers sent soldiers to arrest union officers in other trades, for example, for threatening to call a strike on a local building operation. Workers throughout the city believed that the federal government opposed them and that the [army] regulars would stay as long as the steelworkers remained on strike. The army was not withdrawn until the strike was declared off. The feeling of the steelworkers, then, might be summed up thus: that local and national government not only was not their government (i.e" in their behalf) hut was government in behalf of interests opposing theirs; that in strike times government activities tended to break strikes. Finally the press in most communities, and particularly in Pittsburgh, led the workers there to the belief that the press lends itself instantly and persistently to strike breaking. They believed that the press immediately took sides, printer! only the news favoring that side, suppressed or colored its records, printed advertisements and editorials urging the strikers to go back, denounced the strikers and incessantly misrepresented the facts. All this was found to be true in the case of the Pittsburgh papers. Foreign-language papers largely follow ed the lead of the English papers. The average American-born discriminating citizen of Pittsburgh could not have obtained from his papers sufficient information to get a tme conception of the strike; basic information was not in those papers. To sum up the social consequences of a non-union labor policy, especially that of the Steel Coqvoration, is plainly difficult; the manifestations were so wide and so various. The beaten steelworker displayed little interest in governmental institutions; instead he had acquired a rather active distrust of them. While many of the "foreigners" began piling up money to get themselves out of America, the great majority began waiting for "the next strike." That was the only resource thoughtfully provided for them among the democratic American institutions. sinister acts have followed, until no Nineteenth-Ward Italian feels quite secure in holding his job unless he is backed by the friendship of the alderman. According to the Civil Service law, a laborer has no right to a trial; many are discharged by the foreman, and find that they can be reinstated only upon the aldermanic recommendation. The alderman thus practically holds his old power over the laborers working for the city, and the popular mind is convinced that an honest administration of the Civil Service is impossible, and that it is but one more instrument in the hands of the powerful. It will be difficult to establish genuine Civil Service among these men who learn only by experience. To their minds it is "no good." The positive evils of corrupt government are bound to fall heaviest upon the poorest and least capable. When the water of Chicago is foul, the prosperous buy water bottled at distant springs; the poor have no alternative but the typhoid fever which comes from using the city's supply. When the garbage contracts are not enforced, the well-to-do pay for private service; the poor suffer the discomfort and illness which are inevitable from a foul atmosphere. The prosperous businessman has a certain choice as to whether he will treat with the boss politician or preserve his independence on a smaller income; but to an Italian day-laborer it is a choice between obeying the commands of a political boss or practical starvation. Again, a more intelligent man may philosophize a little upon the present state of corruption, and reflect that it is but a phase of our commercialism, from which we are bound to emerge. At any rate, he may solace himself with the ideals of literature and history. But the more ignorant man who lives only in the narrow present has no such resource. Slowly the conviction enters his mind that politics is a matter of favors and positions, that self-government means pleasing the boss and standing in with the gang. This slowly acquired knowledge he hands on to his family. During the month of February his boy may come home from school with rather incoherent tales about Washington and Lincoln, and the father may for the moment be fired to tell of Garibaldi, but such talk is only periodic, and the long year round the fortunes of the entire family, even to the opportunity to earn food and shelter, depend upon the boss. This lowering of standards, this setting of an ideal, is perhaps the worst of the situation, for daily by our actions and decisions we not only determine ideals for ourselves, but largely for each other. We are all involved in this political corruption, and as members of the community stand indicted. This is the penalty of a democracy—that we are bound to move forward or retrograde [backward] together. None of us can stand aside, for our feet are mired in the same soil, and our lungs breathe the same air. Guiseppe Garibaldi (1807- 1882) was an Italian nationalist and military leader who helped to bring about the unification of Italy. American migrants often moved first to a nearby town, then to a larger regional city, and finally to one of the giants, such as Chicago or New York. Immigrants from abroad frequently moved immediately to large cities. They avoided both cities in the South and interior cities such as Indianapolis or Kansas City. The growth of urban areas demanded a new technology to cope with problems such as transportation, communication, water supply, waste disposal, housing, roads, fighting, and sewage. Before the Civil War, the horse-drawn bus, the steam railroad, and the horse-drawn railway car had been developed to allow for rapid movement through cities. New York built an elevated fine for steam railroads just after the Civil War. A few years later, a number of cities, including New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco, pioneered in the use of cable cars. The most important innovation, however, took place in the 1880's and 1890's when the electric-powered railway, or streetcar, made its appearance. Streetcars spread rapidly throughout the nation. Their development made the use of the subway possible; experiments in both Boston and New York City around 1900 pros ed the practicality of this new development. Bridges, developed on new principles during the 1870's, helped fink parts of the new cities, many of which were located on rivers or harbors. Automobiles and buses began to appear in cities in large numbers around World War I. Better communication systems accompanied improvements in transportation. The telegraph did little to speed messages within a city. In 1863, however, free urban mail delivery was established in New York City and spread rapidly to other metropolitan centers. The telephone eventually revolutionized urban communication. In 1880, 148 telephone companies in 85 cities had fewer than 50,000 subscribers. By 1900, nearly 800,000 telephones were in use, and their numbers continued to increase rapidly. Additional technological developments helped to make life in the cities more attractive. Experiments with bricks, stone blocks, and wood eventually led to the development of inexpensive asphalt paving, which solved the problem of an efficient road- building material. In the 1880's, the electric carbon arc lamp began to replace less satisfactory' gas and kerosene lamps. The development of the incandescent electric light and of the first central power system (1882) revolutionized fighting and paved the way for the development of the electric motor, an invention which worked dramatic changes in industry. New ways to filter water and to dispose of sewage were developed between 1890 and 1910. Finally, the invention of the steel skeleton and the elevator made it possible to erect tall buildings of the sort which now grace the skyline of every major American city. The cable car was invented in 1873 by Andrew Hallidie to travel the steep hills of San Francisco. A cable running through a trench in the ground's surtace pulls the car. A gripping device attaches the car to the cable. One new idea was that of the suspension bridge which hangs on parallel cables made of twisted steel wire, fastened to high towers. This type of bridge is not as expensive as others. The great powers that the United States desired to maintain Chinese "territorial and administrative entity," or independence. Nobody paid much attention. Russia seized part of the Chinese province of Manchuria shortly afterward, and the United States itself tried unsuccessfully to obtain territory for a naval base on the coast of China. Later attempts by the United States government, during President Taft's Administration, to encourage American businessmen to invest in China to increase American influence were unsuccessful. If America's China policy showed little more than unrealistic good intentions, American policy towards Japan revealed a somewhat more realistic attitude. Presidents Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson understood that the American people were simply not prepared to exert military force in the far Pacific in order to impose American ideas about territorial changes there. In 1904-1905, Japan defeated Russian forces and seized Manchuria and other parts of China controlled by Russia. The United States and Japan then made the secret Taft- Katsura agreement that gave Japan a free hand in Korea in return for a Japanese promise to keep out of activities in the Philippines. The Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908 furthered the two nations' policies of respecting each others' possessions in the Pacific. Even though these two actions were executive agreements made by the Roosevelt Administration, rather than treaties ratified by Congress, they were respected by subsequent administrations. The attitudes and actions of some Americans who lived on the West Coast threatened good relations with Japan. In 1906, these Americans wished to exclude Japanese immigrants and to establish segregated public schools for Oriental children. Japan protested the segregation vigorously. President Roosevelt pressured San Francisco's leaders to halt school segregation in return for his promise to reduce Japanese immigration. He blocked the entry of Japanese immigrants from other countries and concluded a "gentlemen's agreement" according to which Japan promised to keep laborers from emigrating to the United States. In part to show Japan that the United States would make no concessions out of fear or weakness, Roosevelt sent the American navy's sixteen battleships on a trip around the world. They stopped in Japan in order to emphasize the fact that the strength of the United States navy had grown until it was second only to that of Great Britain. American Power and Europe Only in very minor ways had the United States departed from the Monroe Doctrine's pledge of non-intervention in European affairs. The United States had cooperated in submitting certain disputes with other powers to the arbitration of international commissions, especially the Hague Tribunal. Theodore Roosevelt, acting at the request of Germany, had helped to bring about an international conference at Algeciras, Spain, in 1906 to settle a crisis which had arisen over French-German competition in Morocco, a country in North Africa. The Senate had ratified the international agreement about Morocco, but added that such action should not be interpreted as a departure from traditional American nonintervention in the affairs of European nations. This tradition ended when America entered World War I in 1917. The war in Europe had begun in 1914, after a Serbian nationalist assassinated an Austrian archduke. European countries were so deeply involved in alliances that Britain, France, Russia, and Italy found themselves fighting with Serbia against Germany, Austria, and the Ottoman Empire. Since America considered it a European war, it maintained neutrality. American companies, however, were selling supplies and making loans to both sides, but chiefly to the Allies (Britain and its allies). Britain and Germany struggled desperately for control of the seas; both interfered with American commerce. Britain blockaded ports supplying Germany. In 1915, Germany, using its new war vessels, submarines (called U-boats), announced it would sink any boats going with supplies into the war zone it proclaimed around Britain. Americans were shocked when a U-boat sank a British finer, the Lusitania, and caused the deaths of nearly 1200 passengers, including over a hundred Americans. President Wilson sent Germany a strongly worded note. Eventually, after several exchanges of notes and the sinking of another British liner, the Arabic, Germany agreed to An international conference was called in 1899 at the Hague, a city in the Netherlands. The conference set up a Permanent Court of Arbitration, sometimes called the Hague Tribunal, to encourage nations to settle their disputes through mediation. Serbia Is now part of Yugoslavia. Germany claimed that the Lusitania was carrying rifles and ammunition. Equal Opportunity in a Democratic Society As Americans entered the last decades of the twentieth century they were acutely aware that the relationships of blacks and whites in the United States had recently changed dramatically. The changes grew largely out of a rising concern for equality of opportunity for black Americans. The campaign for equality produced new educational and job opportunities but its by-products included riots and assassinations. The fate of the campaign appeared uncertain. What did seem certain was that the success or failure of the quest for equal opportunity would help to determine the meaning and future of American democracy. The black Americans' search for equality in civil rights and equal access to jobs, education, and housing stretched back to the Revolutionary War. Their battle overlapped the struggles, past and present, of other minority groups for equality in American society; it resembled them in some ways but differed significantly in others. Immigrant groups arriving in the nineteenth century often met the same sorts of prejudice and discrimination faced by Negroes. They often worked as laborers or at menial jobs, clustered in slums under dismal conditions, and struggled to deal with unfamiliar customs and language. Women, who constituted half of Americans, also suffered legal and political discrimination. The Indians who survived the loss of their land to the dominant whites were treated as separate and inferior dependents by an indifferent American society. Even recent arrivals like the Mexican-Americans in the Southwest and the Puerto Ricans of the cities on the east coast encountered discrimination of many kinds. Each of these groups can tell a story that reveals much about the history of American democracy. Yet only among the ten percent of Americans who are identified as Negroes has the problem of achieving equality proved so serious as to constitute a crisis. To examine the reasons this is so, this chapter turns first to the American descendants of African immigrants, through readings that reveal their protests in the twentieth century. The historical essay, the last reading in the chapter, will relate the experience of blacks to those of other minority groups in recent American history. Garvey is referring to the provisions of the Versailles Treaty which ended World War I and disabled Germany. Many American Jews had supported the creation of a new state in Palestine as a Jewish homeland, and Irish- Americans had supported Ireland's Independence from Britain. When the state of Israel was eventually carved out of Palestine, and when part of Ireland was established as the Independent state of Eire, American Jews and Irish-Americans continued to consider themselves Americans. Out of this very reconstruction of world affairs will come the glorious opportunity for Africa's freedom. Out of the present chaos and European confusion will come an opportunity for the Negro never enjoyed in any other age, for the expansion of himself and the consolidation of his manhood in the direction of building himself a national power in Africa. No one believes in the permanent disablement of Germany, but all thoughtful minds realize that France is but laying the foundation through revenge for a greater conflict than has as yet been seen. With such another upheaval, there is absolutely no reason why organized Negro opinion could not be felt and directed in the channel of their own independence in Africa. To fight for African redemption does not mean that we must give up our domestic fights for political justice and industrial rights. It does not mean that we must become disloyal to any government or to any country wherein we were born. Each and every race outside of its domestic national loyalty has a loyalty to itself; therefore, it is foolish for the Negro to talk about not being interested in his own racial, political, social and industrial destiny. We can be as loyal American citizens or British subjects as the Irishman or the Jew, and yet fight for the redemption of Africa, a complete emancipation of the race. Fighting for the establishment of Palestine does not make the American Jew disloyal; fighting for the independence of Ireland does not make the Irish-American a bad citizen. Why should fighting for the freedom of Africa make the Afro-American disloyal or a bad citizen? The Universal Negro Improvement Association teaches loyalty to all governments outside of Africa; but when it comes to Africa, we feel that the Negro has absolutely no obligation to any one but himself. 114 Breakthrough in Civil Rights: Laws and Reactions The slow and painstaking efforts of civil-rights groups, led by the NAACP, to strike down laws requiring or permitting segregation in public facilities and discrimination in other civil rights, achieved full success in the years after World War II. Both the United States Supreme Court and lower courts declared all segregation laws illegal, and governmental agencies began enforcing desegregation in public facilities. By the 1960's, also, an increasing number of Negroes had won election to public offices. They included, for example, the first Negroes to sit in the Georgia legislature since Reconstruction, the first southern Negro sheriffs since that era, the first Negro United States Senator ever elected from a northern state, and the first Negro mayors of large northern cities. As far back as 1915, the Supreme Court had begun striking down segregation laws. Among the first of these laws were Maryland and Oklahoma constitutional provisions that discriminated against Negro voting and a Louisville, Kentucky, city law that tried to enforce racial segregation by neighborhoods. In the years between the two World Wars, the Supreme Court cut down little by little the areas in which segregation could legally operate. For example, it prohibited political parties from holding primary elections restricted to white voters and ordered states to admit Negroes to university graduate schools where no separate and equal facilities were available for them. The resulting changes were significant, but they came slowly and affected only a few people. World War II, in which about a million American Negroes served in the armed forces, marked a dividing line. In the years immediately after the war many states, led by New York, adopted Fair Employment Practice Acts designed to prohibit discrimination in employment. The federal government moved to integrate the armed forces. And the Supreme Court struck down a variety of segregation laws in the vast area of the use of public facilities. The most crucial and controversial of the Court's decisions came on May 17, 1954, when, in Brotcn vs. The Board of Education, the Court declared that segregation in the public schools was illegal. In a subsequent ruling, the Court added that segregated schools had to desegregate "with all deliberate speed." Although many whites, especially from the South, protested this decision strongly, there was relatively little open conflict over it. Most school districts in border states moved gradually to comply with the law, while most of those in the deep South maintained segregation. Reading 114 contains two excerpts related to subsequent events. The first describes the reaction of the federal government to opposition by the local and state governments to the desegregation in 1957 of Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas. The second presents some results of a nationwide survey of white attitudes toward Negroes and their efforts to obtain equal opportunities. As you read, think about the following questions: 1. What did President Eisenhower do in the Little Rock crisis? Why was this action significant? 2. Do you think that the federal government ought to support the courts with force, if necessary? Why, or why not? The 1954 decision reversed the Plessy vs. Ferguson decision of 1896, in which the Court said that "separate but equal" facilities were acceptable. 116 The Uncertain Quest for Equality In 1941 a distinguished Swedish economist, Cunnar Myrdal, wrote a book about Negroes and whites in the United States called An American Dilemma. Whites had created a deep dilemma, Myrdal thought, by denying equality to Negroes while they themselves preached equality as a central part of the American democratic system. As a result, eighty years after the end of slavery, Negroes remained victims of prejudice, limited opportunity, poverty, and segregation in the midst of the world's greatest democracy, while whites were troubled by the contradiction between their principles and their practices. Even in 1944, however, the groundwork for change had been established. Industrialization and urbanization had shifted Negroes out of the rural South. Political action by both whites and Negroes had begun to make an impact on discrimination. Since World War II, the contest between those who have sought to end the dilemma and those who have tried to preserve it has created a dramatic story. Why were Negroes, of all American minority groups, the chief victims of the dilemma described by Myrdal? Minorities and Their Strengths Many immigrant groups have suffered prejudice and discrimination in American society. Those who arrived in the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries—the years when most Negroes were living for the first time as free men—were not exceptions. Newcomers from Europe, Asia, Canada, and Latin America found many doors closed to them. Catholics had long experienced hardships in a largely Protestant society. Jews, both the newly arrived and the long established, felt a new- wave of animosity, part of a tide of racism which rose in the early twentieth century throughout the Western world. Later arrivals, especially those from Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Cuba, repeated the experiences of earlier immigrants. Yet the newcomers often possessed important resources that helped them come to terms with American society. They identified themselves with the cultures of their homelands and took pride in their religions. Their sense of being Germans, or Poles, or Chinese, or Catholics, or Jew's served as a basis for group solidarity. Out of this solidarity emerged organizations designed to promote their economic interests, to use their political power effectively, to sustain their religious faith, and to encourage pride in their identities. Most of the immigrants adopted American ways and came to think of themselves as Americans. But they did so gradually, maintaining their "old world" identities as long as they wished. They were Americans, but they were also Irishmen, Hungarians, or Japanese. Above all, both the immigrants and their organizations gained power from the strength of family groups which gave individual immigrants security' in a strange new land. Black freedmen, on the other hand, lacked many of these sources of strength. Although their African ancestors, like other immigrants, came from complex societies with rich cultures, American Negroes had been cut off from their heritage by slavery. They quickly lost specific knowledge of the customs, traditions, and languages of their African homelands. Under the conditions of slavery they adopted the language and ways of the whites. But the slave system blocked their access to American education, literature, and politics. They also lacked the support of strong families to help them make use of American ways. Their family ties, as well as their broader social ties, were undermined by the operations of the slave system. Thus the freedman emerging from slavery was not really an Afro- American, a man who could find part of his identity' in a knowledge of another country and culture. He was simply a black American, who drew his sense of who he was from the ways his former masters treated him. As bad as this treatment often was, few freedmen emigrated to Africa or elsewhere from the only' homes they had ever known. Most blacks continued to live in the rural South, in a well- defined place in society. Migration to the city', which gave them a new kind of life, did not change their standing in society. One fact illustrates the distinctive position of Negroes in American society. Although blacks and whites had intermixed from the earliest times until millions of Americans had some white and some black ancestors, most whites classified all these people as "Negroes." To most whites, any sign of African ancestry' was a sign of inferiority. A comparison of the experience of Negroes with those of Indians and Spanish-speaking Americans during the last century gives perspective to the history' of all three groups. Whites herded most Indians who survived the white occupation of the country into reservations, where they lived almost entirely separate from the rest of American society. Even though their lands were often cramped and infertile, they continued to remain apart in order to preserve tribal life. But despite tribalism, Indians suffered a sharp cultural shock. Their cultures had usually given glory to the achievements of hunters, fishermen, and warriors. Now the restrictions of reservation life made it virtually impossible to live by hunting and fishing, and the army stopped warfare. Many Indians on reservations came to depend increasingly on government rations of food and clothing Although the term "Negro" refers to a member of one of the three major races, in the United States it is often applied to people of mixed racial background who have any African ancestry. One Mexican-American laborer, Cesar Chavez, organized the grape-pickers of California into a union, the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee, which is affiliated with the AFL-CIO. He launched a campaign and boycott against those vineyards that did not recognize his union. His boycott won support in the East to keep alive. Both tribal and individual morale declined sharply. Dominant American values, as taught in the white-run schools on the reservations did little to foster a favorable self-concept among Indian youth; children learned, in effect, that whites regarded them and their traditional cultures as inferior. American society has still not solved the problem of the separateness of Indian life. Americans from Spanish-speaking countries constitute a loosely related set of minority groups whose experiences have been influenced both by length of residence in the United States and by ethnic identity. The original Indian population of Mexico and the West Indies became intermixed with both Spanish and African peoples. The earliest Spanish-speaking peoples in the American Southwest came from this mixed group. They increased in number gradually, then rapidly. Since 1924, when large-scale European immigration to the United States was cut off, Mexico has been the chief source of immigrants to this country. More than three million Mexican-Americans now live in the Southwest and West. Most Mexican immigrants have been agricultural workers who encountered widespread prejudice and discrimination from native Americans. They also suffered from educational handicaps and lacked political power. Yet they have begun to achieve a higher economic, social, and political place fairly rapidly in recent years. About 250,000 Mexican-Americans served in the armed forces during World War II, thus taking a step towards merging with American society. The election to Congress after World War II of its first Mexican-Americans, Edward Royal of California and Henry Gonzalez of Texas, suggests growing political participation and strength. School segregation of Mexican-Americans has begun to weaken recently. The conditions of agricultural labor in the Southwest, especially those of the "braceros" who migrated to the United States each year to work at harvesting crops, have been improved, partly through government action but also through the efforts of such organizations as the Alianza Hispana-Americana. In 1960, more than 900,000 Puerto Ricans lived in the continental United States. Most of them came to the mainland after World War II. While all Puerto Ricans are American citizens, the Spanish- speaking arrivals, many of whom have dark skins, constituted a clearly defined minority, set off from both white and black native Americans by their language and customs. They concentrated in eastern cities, especially in New York City, where they reached a strength of nearly 700,000 in 1960. Puerto Ricans, too, encountered discrimination and segregation. Typically they were poor, lacked skills needed for urban industrial or commercial jobs, and often had little education. Yet in the relatively few years after they became a sizable minority, Puerto Ricans adapted rapidly to their new circumstances. Like Mexican- Americans, they began to make their political weight felt, and benefited from activities of their social and religious organizations. Both Puerto Ricans and Mexican-Americans came from westernized cultures which gave them a base from which to adapt to American society. American Indians did not; in order to adjust, they had to abandon tribal culture completely. .American blacks occupied a still different position. They had neither cultural ties to a homeland, such as those of Spanish-speaking Americans, nor a traditional tribal culture with few points of contact with an urban, industrial society. But if they were neither an immigrant group, nor a traditional tribe, nor full members of American society, who were they? The Problem of Assimilation When different social groups come in contact, one or more of four processes takes place. One group may exterminate the other, as whites did to some Indian tribes. At the other extreme, the groups may amalgamate through intermarriage until they lose separate identities, as many English, Dutch, Swedish, German, and Scotch- Irish immigrants did in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Between these two extremes lie accommodation, in which conflicting groups live with each other while retaining their separate identities, and assimilation, a process through which cultural differences between groups are gradually reduced until their members accept each other fully. Until recent years, most Negroes have probably wanted to assimilate with the white community. The barriers to assimilation did not at first seem to be of major importance. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Negroes were far more interested in getting equal treatment before the law' and winning a chance at jobs and education than in gaining full acceptance by whites. Since the issue of assimilation w'as not then important, and since Negroes started from a position of severe disadvantage, Negro leaders sought white aid and accepted it gladly in organising protest and welfare movements. But they maintained the ideal of integration as a goal. The industrial training programs of such institutions as Booker T. Washington's Tuskegee Institute depended heavily on the gifts of such white philanthropists as Andrew Carnegie. Both the NAACP and the National Urban League were joint Negro-white organizations. Most of the direct-action organizations that grew up after World War II, such as the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) and the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) were also interracial in membership and control when founded. Racism prevailed in the early years of the twentieth century. More than 100 Negroes suffered death by lynching in some years. CORE, originally a local group set up to fight discrimination in Chicago, was organized by James Farmer on a national level in 1942. SNCC, organized in 1960, draws its support primarily from college students. Like CORE, it engages in such direct action protests as ''freedom-rides" and "sit-ins." After 1966, CORE and SNCC became more militant, favoring the "black power" philosophy of Stokely Carmichael. By 1967, SNCC numbered only a few hundred members. The Demonstration Cities and the Metropolitan Development Acts of 1966 provided federal funds to plan and develop model neighborhoods in some eighty cities across the entire nation. But despite these attempts at reform, urban housing continued to deteriorate faster than society could clear slums and erect modern apartments. Several measures helped to reform American education. The Elementary' and Secondary Education Act appropriated $1.3 billion for a wide variety of programs in education leading to improved teacher training, funds for books and equipment, and similar goals. The Higher Education Act provided scholarships for college students and money for books and laboratories, and established the National Teacher Corps to prepare teachers for substandard schools. The Cold War GI Bill offered financial support to veterans who had served for more than six months in the armed services since when the original GI Bill, passed during World War II, had expired. Finally, Congress established the National Foundation of Arts and Humanities. Two measures affected civil rights. The Civil Rights Act of 1965 removed barriers to Negro voting, particularly literacy tests. In addition, the Immigration Act of 1965 abolished both the national origins and the quota systems which had been in force since the 1920's. A new annual ceiling on immigration, 120,000 from the Western hemisphere, and 170,000 from elsewhere, went into effect. Finally, Congress passed a number of minor measures which had to do with safety or with the pollution of the environment. A Truth- in-Packaging Act required manufacturers to state what their products contained. The Motor Safety Vehicle Act established safety standards for new cars. Highway beautification projects, supported strongly by Mrs. Johnson, and increased programs to prevent air and water pollution, made a start in these directions. This significant legislative spurt ended in 1966. The Republicans made a comeback in Congress in the off-year elections, gaining 47 seats in the House and 3 in the Senate. Perhaps more important, however, were the influence of the Vietnamese War, the racial troubles which haunted American cities, and revolts by young people, particularly on college campuses. These issues divided American society more deeply than anything else since the 1930's. Vietnam; The Black Revolt; The Student Protests In 1964, about 25,000 American soldiers served in Vietnam. By 1968, this number had increased to more than a half million. American battle deaths rose steadily—1728 in 1965; 6053 in 1966; 11,048 in 1967; 14,592 in 1968. 