1. What differences do you notice between the English colonies and the French and Spanish colonies? 2. What does this show you about the reasons for colonization? What kind of person do you suppose came to America from England? What did he want? How would he differ from the French or Spanish colonist? 3. What effect do you think the English reasons for colonization would have on English relations with the Indians? Would the English be likely to get along with the Indians better or worse than the French and Spanish? 4. Do you think the English would have any contact with the French and Spanish? If so, would they get along well? Give reasons for your answers. 5. How unified were the interests of the English settlers? 21. A Closer Look at the English Colonies The territory of the English colonies stretched along the eastern coast of America from Maine to Georgia. The early settlements were mainly near the ocean. As time went on, the colonies gradually extended inland, generally along the more important rivers. The colonial territory was made up of three regions which differed as to soil, climate, and opportunity. These areas were: New England, comprising Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and Connecticut; the Middle Colonies—New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Delaware; and the South composed of Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina, and Georgia. The following paragraphs explain some of the differences between these areas. The author of this selection, however, emphasizes Maryland, Virginia, and South Carolina in his discussion of conditions in the South. Determine the main characteristics of each area. In the main New England was a homogeneous community with the town as the unit of its settlement... Unlike the colonists of Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, the New Englanders settled in compact, nucleated villages—little congregations of men and women of like minds, socially similar in temperament, clustered closely about the meeting-house, the village green, and the school... Wherever the Pilgrim or Puritan found a resting place he set up a form of local life thoroughly characteristic of himself and his traditions. He had lived in towns of old England and he had cultivated the soil in the open field, dwelling in close proximity [nearness! to his fellows, owning land in small parcels, and using pasture and woodland in common with his neighbors. In a majority of cases he had come to America not as an isolated individual but as a member of a group or company of Christians covenanted together with God, an indissoluble religious body Covenanted means bound together by a which became the basis of the town in Massachusetts, Plymouth, pledge, and Connecticut.... ...(The) people of New England deemed themselves supreme lords of their own lands .. . The New Englander held his land either as an outright gift or as his share of territory purchased from a common fund, and his tenure [ownership right), subject only to the higher needs of the community, was for the most part absolute. Imbued (filled) with the idea of religious and political equality for all the "godly men," he endeavored to divide evenly the advantages and burdens of the community by distributing land in small and scattered parcels and by giving every one a share in whatever means of subsistence the town possessed. He forbade accumulation of landed property... All undivided land was owned either by the original proprietors or by the town... ...[Among] the people who settled Virginia there existed no homogeneity, no similarity of origin, customs, experience, political principles, or religious thought. In making their settlements the Virginia colonists were subject to none of those influences that drew the New Englanders into a close Congregational organization by towns. Very few of the Virginians were either Puritans or Separatists, and those few were bound by no church covenant or plantation compact. Though liberty of religion prevailed, the Church of England was made formally the established church of the colony and its clergy were supported by general taxation. There was but one plan of settlement, that provided by the higher authorities. . . . there was nowhere compactness of life or grouping of colonists. Coming to America with no definite plan of settlement in mind and having no common bond, religious or otherwise, the Virginians felt more readily than the New Englanders the effects of climate, soil, and open country. The heat of the climate, the wide stretches of land, and the ease with which tobacco was cultivated, determined their manner of life, and we find them scattered along the banks of the rivers in private plantations, so far apart as to demand a loose political organization, first of hundreds and eventually of counties. "Means of subsistence" are means of obtaining rood, clothing, and shelter. A colonial "proprietor" was a person or company that had been granted ownership of land along with the right to govern it. "Separatists" were people, like the Pilgrims and Quakers, who had separated from the Church of England. "Hundreds" were English subdivisions of colonies. "Quit-rent" was the money or goods that the colonists paid to the company for use of the land. An "emigrant" is a person who leaves one place to settle in another. An "aristocrat" is a member of a small, privileged upper class. The 'topography'' of a region is its natural characteristics, such as the kind of soil it has and the number of rivers. The system of land distribution was a matter of vital importance in the history of Virginia. In New England the final partition of the soil among the settlers was effected by the colonists themselves according to their own ideas. In Virginia, on the other hand, the company which had paid for setting up the colony) controlled the entire land system. At first no such thing as private property prevailed. Not until 1614 was any land distributed to colonists, and the little that was given out was burdened with a quit-rent of corn and an obligation to labor for the company one month in the year. Not until 1618 did any general distribution take place. Even then, the acquiring of a title was difficult, and at first the land was largely controlled by the shareholders of the company, two thirds of whom remained in England. Later, any emigrant who paid his own passage money might have fifty acres; but in the main the holdings were large and there were no such minute properties as in New England. It has been estimated that from 1632 to 1650 the average area acquired by grant in Virginia was four hundred and forty-six acres and later grants often rose as high as twenty thousand acres. The grants steadily increased in size as the years passed, and were held, not in scattered parcels, but in compact masses forming wide and isolated farms. They were cultivated, not by the owner, but by white servants and negroes, neither of whom had any rights to the soil. The result of these conditions was social inequality; the country was divided into large plantations; accumulation of property in single hands became a natural and inevitable consequence, and a life essentially aristocratic arose.... The Economy .. . [The) influence of topography, climate, and staple products [was even more important] in determining the direction that colonial development should take. New England had few rivers and harbors, was broken by small mountain chains, and offered no wide stretching acres or single staple product adapted to plantation life. Virginia and Maryland on the other hand, had great bays and rivers, veritable highways into the heart of the colonies .. . [They had] arable lands stretching from river to river and lying adjunct [next] to great bodies of water like Chesapeake Bay... [They also had a] milder climate which led the colonists to seek the easier road to wealth and to scorn the harder pursuits that a colder climate encourages... [Virginia and Maryland, therefore,] not only became agricultural, but made one form of agriculture their absorbing interest. .. .[Tobacco became] the only staple that Virginia exported to England, and though Maryland No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected, be appointed to any civil Office under the authority of the United States, which shall have been created, or the Emoluments [salary] whereof shall have been encreased during such time; and no Person holding any Office under the United States, shall be a Member of either House during his Continuance in Office. Section 7. All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills. Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a Law, be presented to the President of the United States; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his Objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House, it shall become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by Yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law. Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (ex- cept on a question of Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed hy two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a bill. Section 8. The Congress shall have Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United States; 2. No independent executive. 2. No independent executive. 4. Congress had no power to lay or collect taxes. 5. Congress could not regulate trade. 7. Congress could not force obedience to its laws or to the Articles. To borrow Money on the Credit of the United States; To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes; To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States; To coin Money, regulate the Value thereof, and of foreign Coin, and fix the Standard of Weights and Measures; To provide for the Punishment of counterfeiting the Securities and current Coin of the United States; To establish Post Offices and post Roads; To promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries; To constitute Tribunals inferior to the supreme Court; To define and Punish Piracies and Felonies committed on the high Seas, and Offences against the Law of Nations; To declare War, grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal, and make Rules concerning Captures on Land and Water; To raise and support Armies, but no Appropriation of Money to that Use shall be for a longer Term than two Years; To provide and maintain a Navy; To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces; To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions; To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the Militia, and for governing such Part of them as may be employed in the Service of the United States, reserving to the States respectively, the Appointment of the Officers, and the Authority of training the Militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress; To exercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases whatsoever, over such District (not exceeding ten Miles square) as may, by Cession [grant] of particular States, and the Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of the Government of the United States, and to exercise like Authority over all Places purchased by the Consent of the Legislature of the State in which the Same shall be, for the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals, dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings;—And 7. During Monroe's Presidency, better roads and canals were built to link the East with the West. 8. Prior to 1812, immigration from Europe was about 5,000 a year. Between 1812 and 1830, about 500,000 European immigrants came to the United States, or an average of almost 28,000 people each year. 9. In 1837, there were many business and farm failures. 1. Review the selections by Birkbeck and Parkman, on pages 294 and 295, and the newspaper account of 1844, on page 296. What reasons does each offer to explain why people would want to go west? 2. What reasons do Chastellux, Smithwick, Flint, Kelley, and Carson offer to explain why people moved west? 3. Considering all these selections, what were the main reasons I people moved westward? 4. How do the reasons given by the settlers compare with those I offered by the leaders? 5. What reasons for westward expansion does the background information suggest? Ilow might it relate to the specific stale- l ments you have studied? 8. Do you think that the events and conditions of the early 1800's could completely explain expansion? Why or why not? Give l reasons for your answer. 31. Joshua Giddings on Texas The statements made by opponents of expansion also help to Seal the forces behind expansion. The next group of readings is taken from speeches made by Whig congressmen who opposed rica's expansionist policy in the 1840's. During this period, Americans achieved independence and won three wars. They found markets for their abundant farm products and laid the basis for the growth of industry. Americans also built a stable democratic government. Such were the military, economic, and political achievements of the American people. But what were the people like? What were the beliefs and social customs that influenced their actions? The national origins of America's population were changing. A large percentage of the people in America were British during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Then, toward the end of the eighteenth century, large groups of Scotch-lrish came to the Appalachian frontier regions. From 1830 to 1850, the Irish made up almost 50 per cent of the immigrants who came to America. The Irish often settled in the eastern seaboard cities. They provided much of the manual labor that went into construction of the nation's canals and railroads. By the 1850's large numbers of Germans, Dutch, Belgians, and Scandinavians were coming to the United States. These people went west and settled in Wisconsin. Ohio, Missouri, and Texas. J. Hector St. |ohn de Crevecoeur, a Frenchman who migrated to America before the Revolution, remarked that Americans "area mixture of English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes. From this promiscuous [mixed] breed, that race nowcalled Americans have risen." Crevecoeur felt, however, that the uniqueness of America went deeper than national origins. "What is the American, this new man?" he asked. Crevecoeur's question is the main theme of this unit and one you will be asked to answer. As you read about Americans during the years 1800-1860, your principal task will be to decide what they were like. The pioneer was one of the most important representatives of early America. As you learned in Unit IV, large numbers of people moved west during the early nineteenth century. Whereas only 6 per cent of Americans lived west of the Allegheny Mountains in 1790, by 1820 these westerners accounted for 27 per cent of the population. Forty-five per cent of the population lived west of the between the blacks and their millions of sympathizing friends in the free states. The consequence would be that the men of fortune would gather up their transferable property, and seek a home in some other country. The poor men—those of little means—the very men on whom the senator relies to aid him in carrying out his great scheme of emancipation, would alone be compelled to remain: their poverty, and not their will, would compel them to remain. In the course of a few years, with no one going to the state, and thousands on thousands leaving it in one constant stream, the present equilibrium [balance] between the races would be lost. In a few years, the disparity [inequality.' would probably be some three, four, or five to one in favor of the blacks. In this state of things, it is not difficult to see what would be the white man's condition. If he should be allowed to maintain his equality he might think himself fortunate; superiority would be a thing not to be dreamed of. The negroes being vastly in the majority, would probably claim the ascendency [superior position] in the social, and in all other circles. If the white man, reduced to such a condition, were allowed to marry his sons to negro wives, or his daughters to negro husbands, he might bless his stars. If the senator from New York expects the aid of non- slaveholders in the South in bringing about this state of social relations, let me tell him he is greatly mistaken. 1. According to Brown, what would a non-slaveholder have to fear from abolition? 2. Considering the information on population that you studied in Section I (pages 456—457), how valid do you think Brown's population figures are? The Threat from Northern Politicians By the 1850's, various political groups had formed in the North to challenge the expansion of slavery. The Free-Soil party, organized in 1848, was one such group, jefferson Davis stated the southern position in an attack on the Free-Soil party. Davis, a planter and political leader from Mississippi, became president of the Confederate States of America, the government formed by the states that withdrew from the Union, What do you propose, gentlemen of the Free-Soil Party? Do you propose to better the condition of the slave? Not at all. What then do you propose? You may say you are opposed to the expansion of slavery... Is the slave to be benefited by it? Not at all. It is not humanity that influences you in the position which you now occupy before the country ... It is that you may have an opportunity of cheating us that you may have a majority in the Congress of the United States and convert the Government into an engine of northern aggrandizement. It is that your section may grow in power and prosperity upon treasures unjustly taken from the South, like the vampire bloated and gorged [stuffed] with the blood which it has secretly sucked from its victims ... You desire to weaken the political power of the southern states; and why? Because you want, by an unjust system of legislation, to promote the industry of the New England states, at the expense of the people of the South and their industry. "Aggrandizement" is the acquisition of great power, wealth, etc. 1. What does Davis claim is the real reason for northern opposition to the expansion of slavery? The Journey to a New Land Immigration to the United States occurred in waves. The English were predominant in the first wave of immigration, in the seventeenth century, while the Scotch-lrish and Germans were predominant during the eighteenth century. In the period preceding the Civil War, the greatest number of immigrants were from Ireland and Germany. From 1890 to 1918, no one nationality was predominant among the immigrants from many different countries entering the United States. Between 1901 and 1910 alone, nearly 9 million people migrated to this country—more than the -v.iii 2P £ ZLi % combined populations of the states of New York, Maryland, and New Hampshire in 1900. After their arrival in America, many immigrants recorded their V stories. The following selections are typical of what many immigrants experienced during this period. Edward Corsi, the author of the second selection, became Commissioner of Immigration at Ellis Island twenty-four years after his arrival in America. The third selection is by O. E. Rolvaag, whose novels about pioneer life in the Last West have become American classics. Why these immigrants came to America. What problems faced the immigrant. Our family came to this country in 1906 for several reasons. My father had to serve in the army in Czechoslovakia, and while he was in the army, he was injured by a cavalry horse. We all worked very hard to save enough money to buy our own home. Finally, a few years after my father died, my mother did have her own home. Edward Corsi, In the Shadow of Liberty, reprinted in We Came to America, edited by Frances Cavanah (Philadelphia: Macrae Smith Company, 1954), pp. 146-47, 151-53. Reprinted by permission of Emme Corsi. During the nineteenth century, Giuseppe Mazzini fought for the liberation and unification of Italy. . .. My father, in his youth, had become a disciple of the Italian patriot, Giuseppe Mazzini. The longing for freedom, not for himself alone but for his fellow men, was in my father's blood. In the newspaper which he edited he waged relentless war on the entrenched classes living at the expense of the peasant... Our lives had always been molded by Father's life; after he died we seemed to have no future. During the years from 1903 to 1907, when immigration to America was at its height, many Italians returned to the little towns in Italy boasting of their success in the United States. We saw strangers proudly wearing heavy gold watch chains that we knew had been bought in the New World. Stories of the ease with which money could be earned in America flew through the whole peninsula. ... Toward the end of the fourth year after my father died, my mother married again. .. . My new father had resigned from the army. To start life over at any work beneath his caste [class] would have been embarrassing in Italy. America was different. There he could take any sort of employment at first, and no one would think the worse of him. Two months later we were on our way. ... I am sure that our life on the East Side [of New York! was typical of the lives of thousands upon thousands of immigrant families. There were many times when we had nothing to eat in the house. There was one period when my stepfather was out of work for eighteen months. When I was old enough for my first job, I went to work as a lamplighter, rising at four in the morning to put out the lamps on my route. Then I would have breakfast and get to school bnine o'clock. All through my boyhood I worked at various odd jobs, paying my Own way through school and at the same time contributing what little I could to the limited family income. I was, in turn, lamplighter, messenger, and clerk in a telegraph office. The few hours that remained for play, and they were few indeed, I spent in the streets. I enjoyed the excitement, the crowds, and the good fellowship of the East Side. I enjoyed loo the company of youngsters like myself, many of whom have risen above the handicaps of their surroundings to useful careers in the community.... I remember clearly the day I led my gang into that house of mystery [a community welfare center where children could play and learnj. I was shabbily dressed and embarrassed, but I think my earnestness must have impressed the head (social) worker, for she singled me out of the group and questioned me at length. She explained in terms that we could understand what she and her co-workers were doing in the neighborhood. We were admitted on probation. We were not to be rough or break windows, as other neighborhood boys had done. We were to have a meeting room and the use of the backyard gymnasium just as long as we behaved. My admission to the Home Garden, later Haarlem House [the community center), marked a decisive advance in my career. ... ...(My) settlement contacts and experiences gave me a new understanding of American life and American ideals. It was a new understanding, because until then such dreams as I had had of the land of promise were well nigh shattered by the grim reality of what I had been forced to undergo. I went without food for A "settlement" is another term for a community center. We Came to America, edited by Frances Cavanah (Philadelphia: Macrae Smith Company, 1954), pp. 198, 201-203. three days and three nights, all the way from New York to South Dakota. ' I left the train at a little station on the Dakota prairie. Looking around, I saw nothing but level land, like the sea. My uncle was to have met me but had made a mistake in the day of my arrival. I tried to ask my way, but no one at the station spoke Norwegian. At last a Swede who worked on the railroad came along, and I was able to communicate with him. He thought he knew approximately where my uncle lived, and gave me some directions; I had a twelve-mile walk ahead of me. When he found that I hadn't eaten for three days, he gave me what remained of his dinner pail—one sandwich and some coffee. I've always blessed the big Swede in my prayers! By this time the sun was going down. I struck out on foot, soon lost my way, and walked far into the night. It was one of those still prairie nights, breathless with heat. I've learned to love them since, but then I was worn out and discouraged. I felt as if I had been dropped down in the midst of nowhere. At last I came upon something in the darkness, a man driving a horse hitched to a wagon. This man was a Norwegian, and he took me to the farm where my uncle was employed. I stumbled into the house more dead than alive. In that experience I learned the first lesson of the immigrant, the first and perhaps the greatest lesson: a feeling of utter helplessness, as if life had betrayed me. It comes from a sense of being lost in a vast alien land. In this case it was largely physical; but I soon met the spiritual phase of the same thing: the sense of being lost in an alien culture, the sense of being thrust somewhere outside the charmed circle of life. If you couldn't conquer that feeling, if you couldn't break through the magic hedge of thorns, you were lost indeed. Many couldn't and didn't and many were lost thereby. 48. What the Immigrant Faced: Jacob A. Riis and John F. Kennedy The first of the next two selections was written by Jacob Riis, an immigrant from Denmark, who became a New York journalist and a personal friend of Theodore Roosevelt. The passage quoted here is from a book he published in 1890 entitled How the Other Half Lives. It deals with the problems many immigrants faced in urban New York. The second selection is by President John F Kennedy, whose grandfather was an Irish immigrant New York's wage earners have no other place to live, more is the pity. They are truly poor tor having no better homes; waxing [growing] poorer in purse as the exorbitant rents to which they are tied ... keep rising. The wonder is that they are not all corrupted, and speedily, by their surroundings. If on the contrary there be a steady working up .. . the fact is a powerful argument for the optimist's belief that the world is after all, growing better, not worse, and would go far toward disarming apprehension, were it not for the steadier growth of the sediment [worst parts] of the slums and its constant menace. Such an impulse toward better things there certainly is. The German ragpicker of thirty years ago, quite as low in the scale as his Italian successor, is the thrifty tradesman or prosperous farmer of today. ... The poorest immigrant comes here with the purpose and ambition to better himself and, given half a chance, might be reasonably expected to make the most of it. To the false plea that he prefers the squalid homes in which his half chance has too long been wanting, and for the bad result he has been unjustly blamed. Jacob A. Riis. How the Other Half lien: Studies Amoni the Tenements of New York [New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1890). A "ragpicker" collects and sells rags and junk. "Squalid'' means neglected and dirty. The Irish were among the first to meet the hostility of an already established group of "Americans." It was not long before employment circulars included the phrase "No Irish need apply." It is not unusual for people to fear and distrust that which they are not familiar M7ith. Every new group coming to America found this fear and suspicion facing them. And, in their turn, members of these groups met their successors with more of the same.... Toward the end of the nineteenth century, immigration to America underwent a significant change. For the first time the major sources of settlers became southern and eastern Europe rather than northern Europe and the British Isles. Large numbers of Italians, Russians and Poles came to this country and their coming created new problems and gave rise to new tensions... . ...For the most part, these were people of the land and, for the most part, too, they were forced to settle in the cities when they i reached America.... Registration of passenger cars reaches 13,479,608. Warren G. Harding dies. Calvin Coolidge becomes President. 1924 Congress establishes quotas, or limits, for the number of immigrants that will be permitted to enter the country. Only 164,000 immigrants are allowed to enter every year. Each country is allowed a specific amount of this total. The English, Irish, and Germans receive the largest quotas. Regular air mail service between New York and San Francisco begins. Harding's Secretary of the Interior, Albert B. Fall, is sentenced to a year in jail for accepting bribes to lease government oil reserves at Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and at Elk Hills, California, to private oil operators. In 1929, one of these operators, Harry F. Sinclair, is sentenced to prison for contempt of court and of the Senate. There are 15,450,649 passenger cars registered. Calvin Coolidge is elected President on the Republican ticket. Despite the many scandals that occurred during the Harding administration, Coolidge receives 15,725,000 popular votes; john W. Davis, the Democratic candidate, 8,387,000; and Robert M. La Follette, the Progressive candidate, 4,823,000 votes. 1925 Labor unions strive for better working conditions. Red Grange, star Illinois football player, is urged to run for Congress although he is under age. Crossword puzzles become a popular fad. The Treasury Department, responsible for enforcing prohibition estimates that the government intercepts only about five per cent of the liquor smuggled into the country. 668 