For almost 150 years, from the founding of the first colonies to 1763, colonists grew up in the New World. Each generation differed a little from the one before; each, adapting itself to the New World environment, seemed a bit less European and a little more American. By the 1770's the change had gone so far that a French settler wrote that "a new man" had emerged on the North American continent. This observer was Michel Guillaume Jean de Crevecoeur. Born in Normandy in 1735, he spent several years in New France as a lieutenant during the French and Indian War. After Montcalm's defeat he made his way into the English colonies. In 1764 he took out naturalization papers in New York and began farming on a considerable scale in Orange County. Between 1770 and 1775 he wrote his Letters from an American Farmer, in which he described the American as strikingly different from the European. Hailed for its perceptiveness, de Crevecoeur's writing may help us to understand colonial America. Use de Crevecoeur's statement as a hypothesis, or tentative explanation of the subject. Then read Chapter 2 and determine whether the information is good evidence to support that statement. Careful analysis of de Crevecoeur may be aided by the following questions: What are the most important influences on "this new man"? What forces were impelling him? A historian has suggested that de Crevecoeur should have included education among the elements that molded the American character Are there others that you would mention? How did they operate? Why did de Crevecoeur define Americans as people of European ancestry, excluding Indians and Negroes? Knowing something about de Crevecoeur, can you see ways in 22 Colonial Generations which his background affected his point of view? Who was this new man? He is an American, who leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and manners, receives new ones from the new mode of life he has embraced, the new government he obeys, and the new rank he holds... Here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men, whose labors and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world. Americans are the western pilgrims, who are carrying along with them that great mass of arts, sciences, vigor, and industry which began long since in the east; they will finish the great circle... The American ought therefore to love this country much better than that wherein either he or his forefathers were born. Here the rewards of his industry follow with equal steps the progress of his labor; his labor founded on the basis of nature, self-interest; can it want a stronger allurement? Wives and children, ... gladly help their father to clear those fields [which] feed and clothe them all... The American is a new man who acts upon new principles; he must therefore entertain new ideas, and form new opinions. From involuntary idleness, servile dependence, penury, and useless labor, he has passed to toils of a very different nature, rewarded by ample subsistence. — This is an American. [The abundance of land, and lack of feudal traditions, said de Crevecoeur, had molded this new man:] Where is that station which can confer a more substantial system of felicity than that of an American farmer, possessing freedom of action, freedom of thought, ruled by a mode of government which requires but little from us? [An enlightened Englishman visiting these shores would rejoice to see an almost ideal society:] Here he beholds fair cities, substantial villages, extensive fields, an immense country filled with decent houses, good roads, orchards, meadows, and bridges, where a hundred years ago all was wild, woody, and uncultivated!... He is arrived on a new continent; a modern society offers itself to his contemplation, different from what he had hitherto seen ... The rich and the poor are not so far removed from each other as they are in Europe... We are a people of cultivators, scattered over an immense territory,... united by the silken bands of mild government, all respecting the laws, without dreading their power, because they are equitable. We are all animated with the spirit of an industry, which is unfettered, and unrestrained, because each person works for himself. If he travels through our rural districts, he views not the hostile castle, and the haughty mansion, contrasted with the clay-built hut and miserable cabin, where cattle and men help to keep each other warm, and dwell in meanness, smoke, and indigence. A pleasing uniformity of decent competence appears throughout our habitations... Lawyer or merchant are the fairest titles our towns afford; that of a farmer is the only appellation of the rural inhabitants of our country.. . There, on a Sunday, he sees a congregation of respectable farmers, and their wives, all clad in neat homespun, well mounted, or riding in their own humble wagons. There is not among them an esquire, saving the unlettered magistrate. There he sees a parson as simple as his flock, a farmer who does not riot on the labour of others. We have no princes, for whom we toil, starve, and bleed: we are the most perfect society now existing in the world. Here man is free as he ought to be; nor is this pleasing equality so transitory as many others are. Many ages will not see the shores of our great lakes replenished with inland nations, nor the unknown bounds of North America entirely peopled. Who can tell the millions of men whom it will feed and contain? The American. Oppression and ambition were the two chief factors which led European peoples like the Scots-lrish and the Germans (as well as additional Englishmen) to the American colonies. The Scots-lrish had colonized northern Ireland from Scotland early in the seventeenth century; by the end of the century they were competing so successfully with the English that Parliament passed a number of regulatory laws which reduced them to economic ruin. Jonathan Swift, the author of Gulliver's Travels, wrote in the 1720's, "The old and sick. .. [are] every day dying and rotting by cold and famine and filth and vermin. The young laborers cannot get work, and consequently pine away for want of nourishment to a degree that if at any time they are accidentally hired at common labor, they have not the strength to perform it." The Scots-lrish found their greatest opportunities along the frontiers from Pennsylvania southward. They were in the vanguard of American settlement. The Germans were victims of years of warfare, religious persecution, and heavy taxation and many were desperately poor. They settled especially in Pennsylvania and the middle colonies. For most of the immigrants, the trip across the Atlantic was long and difficult. Gottlieb Mittelberger, who sailed from Germany to Philadelphia in 1750, warned his fellow countrymen of the cost, length, and discomfort of the trip: In Rotterdam, and to some extent also in Amsterdam, the people are packed into the big boats as closely as herring, so to speak. The bedstead of one person is hardly two feet across and six feet long, since many of the boats carry from four to six hundred passengers, not counting the immense amount of equipment, tools, provisions, barrels of fresh water, and other things that also occupy a great deal of space. During the journey the ship is full of pitiful signs of distress — smells, fumes, horrors, vomiting, various kinds of sea sickness, fever, dysentery, headaches, heat, constipation, boils, scurvy, cancer, mouth- rot, and similar afflictions, all of them caused by the age and the highly-salted state of the food, especially of the meat, as well as by the very bad and filthy water.... Add to all that shortage of food, hunger, thirst, frost, heat, dampness, fear, misery, vexation, and lamentation as well as other troubles. Thus, for example, there are so many lice, especially on the sick people, that they have to be scraped off the bodies. All this misery reaches its climax when in addition to everything else one must also suffer through two to three days and nights of storm, with everyone convinced that the ship with all aboard is bound to sink. In such misery all the people on board pray and cry pitifully together. When the ships finally arrive in Philadelphia after the long voyage only those are let off who can pay their sea freight or can give good security. The others, who lack the money to pay, have to remain on board until they are purchased and until their purchasers can thus pry them loose from the ship. Indentured servants. Most immigrants had managed to pay for their passage, but many thousands came as "redemptioners" to be sold into servitude. Those who had to work as indentured servants were bound by contract for a period of years, most often from four to seven. At the end of their service they received a suit of clothes and, if it had been stipulated in their contract, a horse, a cow, or some land. Children bound out to indenture had to serve until they were twenty-one. Runaways were advertised for, and if recaptured had to serve the master extra time. Usually, the men were put to work clearing land and tilling crops on the farms and plantations, and the women were assigned to the wide array of household duties or even to the hoeing of tobacco. But indentured servants who could boast of some education were employed as skilled workers, clerks, or teachers. One Virginian complained in 1773: At least two thirds of the little education we receive are derived from instructors, who are either INDENTURED SERVANTS, OR TRANSPORTED FELONS. Not a ship arrives either with redemptioners or convicts, in which schoolmasters are not regularly advertised for sale, as weavers, tailors, or any other trade; with little difference that 1 can hear of, excepting perhaps that the former do not usually fetch so good a price as the latter. Some indentured servants had indeed been convicted of petty crimes or had served terms in debtors' prison, some were tricked or kidnapped into coming to America, but most were victims of poverty. John Harrower, a forty-year-old Scottish merchant ruined by a depression, contracted to serve four years as a schoolmaster on a plantation; he died before regaining his freedom. In time indentured servants did regain their freedom, and, having learned to be skilled farmers, often obtained plots of land and began to compete with their former masters. Others, impatient, succeeded in running away before their indentures expired. In any event, the demand for the servants was much greater than the supply. Hence, the gradual shift in the South toward the purchase of more and more Africans. The forced immigration of Africans. As early as 1619, Negroes were brought to Virginia and sold as servants on the same basis as whites. By 1660 their legal status was declining, and they and their children were being held permanently as slaves. Unscrupulous planters did not have to enter into contracts with the Negroes, and found economic advantage in engaging in the system of slavery long since followed in the West Indies. Slavery was age-old in Africa itself, and had earlier existed in Europe and Asia. As it developed in Anglo-America, however, the considerable rights that slaves had usually possessed in other continents and times were swept away. Tribes in the interior of Africa obtained slaves through warfare and kidnapping. They sold the slaves to traders on the African coast, where they were loaded onto ships for America. Conditions on the ships were infinitely worse than those on other immigrant ships. Large numbers of the slaves died on their way to the West Indies, where they usually were "seasoned" for about three years before being sold in the North American colonies. Another half died during these three years. One African, Olaudah Equiano, a member of an lbo tribe of the Kingdom of Benin (in pres- ent-day Nigeria), who was thus kidnapped, lived to write a vivid, and essentially accurate, account of his background and experiences: Our land is uncommonly rich and fruitful, and produces all kinds of vegetables in great abundance. We have plenty of Indian corn, and vast quantities of cotton and tobacco ... All our industry is exerted to improve those blessings of nature. Agriculture is our chief employment; and every one, even to children and women, is engaged in it. Thus we are habituated to labor from our earliest years. Every one contributes something to the common stock: and as we are unacquainted with idleness, we have no beggars ... the free inhabitants of each of these states . . . shall be entitled to ail privileges and immunities of free citizens in the several states; and the people of each state shall have free ingress and regress to and from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all privileges of trade and commerce.... Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these states to the records, acts and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other state. (Article II) The Confederation Congress consisted of delegates from each state, with each state paying its own delegates, and each state having one vote in the Congress. Congress did not have the power to tax; it was dependent upon the states for funds. It did, with important limitations, possess certain specified powers. It could — determine peace and war — conduct foreign relations — settle disputes between states — coin money and issue paper money — regulate trade and manage affairs with Indians — fix the standard of weights and measures — establish and regulate post offices — borrow money — maintain an army and navy Some important powers could not be exercised without consent of nine of the thirteen states. The Articles could not be amended without ratification by the legislatures of every state. As it was very difficult to get the states to agree. Congress was seldom effective. The executive department consisted of a so-called President, who simply presided over the Congress, and a Secretary who kept records and communicated with the states. Congress established various committees which were responsible to it. These did create a small bureaucracy, which carried over after 1789 into the new Federal government. General Henry Knox, who headed the War Department, became President Washington's first Secretary of War. The business of the post office, foreign affairs, the treasury, and the navy was conducted by only a handful of men. The Northwest Ordinance. 3.The West was the one area within the United States in which the Congress possessed real power. The most notable achievement of the Congress was the enactment of the Land Ordinance of 1785 and the Northwest Ordinance of 1787. These were vital plans for the future of the nation, more farsighted than any ever before enacted. They provided for the orderly survey and development of western lands, and for the establishment of governments. The territories could, when the lands were sufficiently populous, enter the United States on terms of equality with the original states. This was a great advance over the British system, which developed lands newly occupied by its citizens into colonies under the mother country's control. The great migration across the Appalachians into Tennessee and Kentucky immediately after the Revolution was soon followed by heavy settlement in the area north of the Ohio River, the Why was the inability to tax probably the most serious weakness of the Articles of Confederation? 180 Shaping the American Nation 1. In the period after the War of 1812, what aspects of American life promoted nationalism and sectionalism? 2. What part did government play in the expansion of the economy? At what levels of government was assistance provided? 3. What conflicting sectional interests account for the narrow passage of Calhoun's bill for Federal aid to roads and canals? Why did President Madison veto the bill? The American people, rapidly filling in the rich lands of the river valleys beyond the Appalachians, had little in common with their aged President. The population was growing rapidly despite immigration of less than five thousand per year in the years before 1820. These native-born Americans, developing accents, ways of speech, and customs quite different from those of the English, came to set the standard for the country. When the great floods of European immigrants began to come in the 1840's, they were to be absorbed in a generation or two into the American culture. Much of the culture developed beyond the mountains, where contact with Europe was less than in the port cities of the East Coast. Before the opening of the Erie Canal, farmers made their way to the western part of the northern half of the country by turnpike to Lake Erie, along the road cut during the French and Indian War to Pittsburgh, in Pennsylvania, or a bit farther south, along the Cumberland (or National) Road linking the Potomac and Ohio rivers. Farther south there were routes from Virginia and the Carolinas through the mountains to Kentucky and Tennessee. The most heavily used route during these years was the Cumberland Road to Wheeling on the Ohio River. It cut the journey by stagecoach from Baltimore from eight to four days. Great covered wagons, later to become so conspicuous on the Great Plains of the West, carried freight across the mountains. Prospective settlers who were westward bound also encountered droves of cattle, sheep, and swine being brought eastward to market. It was still too expensive to bring much farm produce east in this fashion. Most of it, like the settlers bound for Wheeling, proceeded on down the Ohio River by flatboat. Freight ultimately reached New Orleans, where it might be transshipped to eastern ports by coastal ships. The great movement of goods was counterclockwise, with the return from the West in this roundabout fashion. Steamboats, which first began to ply the western rivers in 1811, to a certain extent countered the movement downstream. Congress voted funds to clear vast snags of fallen logs and debris out of streams not previously navigable, so that the boats with their flat bottoms and shallow draft could operate on scores of southern and western streams. Westerners joked that they could go wherever there had been a heavy dew. What was more, they were soon free of monopoly restrictions against them. A determined steamboat owner, Thomas Gibbons, fought against the monopoly the state of New York had granted to Robert Fulton. Have European immigrants and minority groups become entirely absorbed into the American culture? Is there such a thing as one American culture? Old houses were subdivided into tiny apartments, and by the 1840's quantities of tenements were arising in New York and elsewhere. The rooms were dark and poorly ventilated. They seldom had running water and never toilets. Rents were so high that a workingman might have to pay as much as a quarter of his wages for two rooms. Yet in 1860 half of New York's million people were living in 18,000 tenements. The workingmen. Laborers and their families had to live this way because they could not afford to live any better. A Philadelphian estimated in 1851 that it took $10.37 per week to maintain a workingman's family in reasonable comfort, and only a small skilled proportion of workingmen earned this sum in the 1850's. Although wages in the United States were a third to a half higher than in England — and sufficiently enticing to bring hundreds of thousands of immigrants — they provided for little beyond necessities. Employers felt they were engaging in sound business practice when they paid workers as little as was necessary to obtain their services, to labor six days a week from sunrise to sunset — about 68 to 72 hours a week. Textile mill owners hired few men, depending upon the cheaper labor of women and children. There was much romanticization of the Lowell mill-girls brought from New England farms to work for $2.50 to $3.00 per week, but they paid $1.25 a week for room and board and slept three in a bed. Yet they were far better off than seamstresses sewing 14 to 18 hours a day in their own rooms for wages ranging from 84 cents to $1.50 per week. Wages of unskilled workmen averaged about 79 cents per day in 1840 and rose to more than a dollar a day in the 1850's. Immigrants, mostly Irishmen, who engaged in the back-breaking digging of canals, were paid about $10 to $12 per month in 1831. Skilled workers, like printers and watchmakers, averaged no better than $12 per week in 1860. Real wages of workers (what they could buy with their pay) improved somewhat between 1820 and 1860, but apparently not very much. Workingmen in the Jacksonian period shared middle-class views and expectations; they hoped themselves to enter the middle class and become proprietors of their own small businesses, as the journeyman craftsmen of the eighteenth century had done. There were a few spectacular examples of individuals who rose from the working class to positions as merchants or manufacturers. But most wage earners remained wage earners, and by the 1850's began to regard themselves as part of a class. A statistical study of Newburyport, Massachusetts, from the 1850's to the 1880's (this town grew very little in this interval) indicates that thrifty workmen, by denying themselves almost every luxury, were just barely able to become homeowners or purchase small pieces of property — their only security in old age. Thus, saving required stern self-discipline. Almost none of the successful workers, and very few of their sons, moved up out of the wage-earner class. This was true of both native-born and immigrants. Nor did the Irish immigrant wage earners of Newburyport or 252 The Westward Course of Democracy in the case of Commonwealth v. Hunt that the Bootmakers' Society of Boston was not violating the law in maintaining what later came to be known as a "closed shop" — barring from employment all but union members. Workingmen were not conspicuously successful, however, either in strikes or in politics, and in times of depression most of their unions disintegrated. The immigrants. A flow of immigrants into the United States began in the 1820's and became a flood in the 1850's. Almost four million Europeans came to America by 1860, half of them in the fifties. Most were Irish, escaping starvation at home, or Germans, who were somewhat better off. The people of Ireland, who were overcrowded and under the domination of English landlords and the British government, had maintained a precarious existence by living almost entirely on potatoes. When the crop was blighted, however, beginning in 1846, there was widespread famine and the Irish started to flee to America in large numbers. Despite their rural background, most of the Irish stayed in the American cities, where they did the most menial work at the lowest wages. They were discriminated against in every way. Advertisements for white- collar workers often carried the admonition "No Irish Need Apply." Some Germans fared better on farms, or as skilled workers both in coastal cities and in Cincinnati, St. Louis, and Milwaukee. Antagonism against the Irish and Germans arose because many of the immigrants were Catholics, and a political movement of the 1850's, Know-Nothing- ism, was directed against them. Some of these immigrants, like John Roach, achieved notable success for themselves, but for most of them success came only to subsequent generations. Free Negroes. Free Negroes, even in northern cities, were more discriminated against than immigrants. Gustave de Beaumont, who accompanied de Tocqueville to America, reported: Though living upon the same soil and in the same cities, the two populations (white and Negro] have a distinct civil existence. Each has its own schools, churches, and cemeteries. In all public places where the two necessarily must be present at the same time, they do not mingle; but separate places are designated for them. ... The same prejudice which heaps scorn upon them forbids them the practice of most professions. ... * In the political sphere the separation is even wider. Though in theory they are allowed to hold public office, they do not do so; there is not a single example of a Negro or mulatto filling public post in the United States. The laws of the Northern states generally recognize that political rights equal to those of the whites belong to free people of color, but nowhere are they permitted to enjoy them. The free colored people of Philadelphia, wishing, a while ago, to exercise their political rights on the occasion of an election, were ejected with force from the room where they had come to cast their votes. Few white Americans, no matter how liberal, would concede equality to Negroes. This was true even of Thomas Jefferson, author of the Declaration of Independence and no lover of slavery. Settlement in Texas. During the years of Spanish control the great prairies of Texas were almost empty of people. When Mexicans won their independence in 1820, there were only three small towns, including San Antonio (the capital), and a population of about four thousand Mexicans who were mostly engaged in cattle ranching. To the east a few Americans had moved across the Sabine River to settle illegally in the Nacogdoches area, and farther north, along the south bank of the Red River. Gradually, the Mexican government opened this area to immigration, even though most of the new population was likely to come from the United States. In 1820 an American, Moses Austin, proposed to the Mexican officials that he be permitted to bring in three hundred settlers, all of whom would become Mexican citizens. Austin, who had been born in Connecticut, had operated a lead mine in Missouri for years but had lost his fortune in a bank failure during the Panic of 1819. Austin received permission, but died on his way back to Missouri. His son, Stephen F. Austin, only twenty- seven, was sensitive, well educated, and an excellent flute player. He scarcely seemed the type to lead rough frontiersmen in establishing a new colony. After some misgivings he undertook the task and became notable for his good judgment, honesty, and diplomatic skills. Somehow he managed to maintain order among the settlers and reduce the understandable mistrust of the Mexican officials. Slowly, his colony took shape. Escaping the effects of the Panic of 1819, by the end of 1823 he had established three hundred families on the rich bottom lands of the Brazos River, around San Felipe de Austin. Each family received one square league of land (13,275 acres). Other settlers followed, and the colony flourished. In 1825 Texas was opened to all Christians who would swear allegiance to Mexico, and generous grants were made to several promoters. By 1830 there were about eight thousand settlers in Texas, almost all of them from the southern states west of the Appalachians. Troubles with Mexico quickly developed. The efforts of the Mexican government to abolish slavery were resisted by many of the settlers who had brought Sam Houston. Gradually after Mexico won its independence, a few Americans began to establish themselves in California. It was even more isolated from Mexico than Texas, and the Spanish-speaking Californians were divided into northern and southern factions. Like New Mexico, it was opened to trade, and after 1827 ships from Boston and Salem loaded with New England goods traded for hides with which to make shoes, and tallow for candles. Richard Henry Dana, who voyaged in one of these ships, wrote in his famous account. Two Years Before the Mast, "We had spirits of all kinds (sold by the cask), teas, coffee, sugars, spices, raisins, molasses, hard-ware, crockery- ware, tinware, cutlery, clothing of all kinds, boots and shoes from Lynn, cal- icos and cottons from Lowell, crapes, silks; also shawls, scarfs, necklaces, jewelry, and combs for the ladies; furniture; and in fact, everything that can be imagined, from Chinese fire-works to English cart-wheels." During these same years many whaling vessels stopped at Monterey for food and fresh water or wintered in San Francisco Bay. The California coastline and its magnificent harbor thus became well known to hundreds of American sailing men. They brought back tales of a pleasant land, a magnificent climate, and a leisurely people — an area they thought surely should become part of the United States. Soon Americans began moving into California. Merchants engaged in the hide and tallow trade sent agents to live at each of the ports and to buy hides when the ships were not in. Thomas O. Larkin, the agent at Monterey, who in 1843 became American consul, wrote glowing accounts of California for American newspapers and prepared the way among Spanish-speaking Californians for annexation. Other Americans acquired ranches and enthusiastically greeted newcomers who arrived from across the mountains. John A. Sutter, who came from Switzerland by way of New York, arrived in 1839, obtained a huge land grant, and built a formidable fort in the Sacramento valley at the end of the trail across the Sierras. Sutter's Fort became a haven for numerous immigrants in the 1840's. Settlement in Oregon. American interest in the Columbia valley was stimulated by missionaries who sought to reach the Indians and sent back reports of the area. A few eastern settlers around 1830 had tried to start a farming community but had been discouraged by Dr. John McLoughlin, whose fort on the Columbia River was the center of Britain's successful fur trade. When the missionaries arrived, they The Whitman mission, Walla Walla. Washington made few converts; but their correspondence to the East aroused interest in the potential of Oregon. In 1833 a Methodist magazine printed an article reporting that Indians from the Oregon country wished the white men's ministers to show them the path to heaven. Within a few months the Methodists sent the thirty-year-old Reverend Jason Lee, whom Dr. McLoughlin directed to the fertile Willamette valley south of the Columbia, where the British did not expect to remain. There were no Indians there, but crops prospered. Presbyterians led by Reverend Marcus Whitman arrived in 1836, bringing with them the first two white women to cross the Rockies, Mrs. Eliza Hart Spalding and Mrs. Narcissa Prentiss Whitman. Mrs. Whitman, who had left New York as a bride in February, 1836, adjusted rapidly to the totally new life of travel along the Oregon Frail, She wrote cheerfully to her Conflict amt Reunion 287 The Civil War and Reconstruction years are, as one leading historian has suggested, "the central epoch in American history." During the 1850's, the sectional conflict which for so long had underlain American nationalism became dominant. The stridency of the quarrel between the South and the North drowned out the voices of those contributing to the social and economic growth of the United States. With the election in 1860 of the Republican candidate for President, Abraham Lincoln, the southern states began to secede, and soon the quarrel moved from rhetoric to a contest of arms. It was a bloody, devastating war which lasted four years and left the nation shattered and bitter. To the South, it was the War for Southern Independence, to preserve the constitutional rights of the states. To the North, it was the War of the Rebellion. President Lincoln proclaimed that the war was being fought to preserve the Union, but in the course of events on the battlefield and in men's minds in the North by 1863 it had also become a war to set slaves free. By the spring of 1865 the overwhelming weight of Union armies and resources left the Confederate armies no recourse but surrender. The painful process of Reconstruction then began. Negro slaves had gained freedom without having new ways of making a living. A great political struggle developed where the military struggle had left off, between those who wanted to rebuild the South on a political base of freedmen's votes and those who wanted to restore the destiny of the South to southern whites bent upon preserving "white supremacy." The Radical Republicans of the North obtained guarantees of the freedom and rights of Negroes in the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth amendments of the Constitution, but by the close of the era around 1877 white supremacy was again dominant. The history of the "central epoch" was and has remained controversial. The facts were contested at the time and disputes have continued into the present. In some intangible ways the condition of workingmen was falling. The growing size of factories removed them from the old face-to-face relationship with their employer. Factories or mills might have 400 employees, and the largest railroads as many as 36,000. In this depersonalized relationship, employers often looked on labor as a commodity to be obtained as cheaply as possible, regardless of basic living needs. "The law of supply and demand regulates the labor market," one employer testified in 1885. "The workingman must submit to that law, and ... it is entirely useless ... to attempt to rebel against its inexorable and inevitable operation." Another employer declared, however, "You cannot have low and depressed labor and a prosperous business or a prosperous country." Some workers, especially those, with skills hard to replace, joined unions and through collective bargaining and strikes tried to improve their pay and working conditions. Many workers, on the other hand, attempted to improve their lot by moving into more highly skilled or white-collar positions, or by setting up their own businesses. Few poor bovaof working-class background, especially if they were immigrants, had much chance to rise to the top of a business or an industry. There were few Andrew Carnegies in real life. Even in the fiction of Horatio Alger, who wrote countless inspirational boys' stories, it was usually a lucky chance that enabled the young apprentice to marry the boss's daughter and in time become the proprietor. Most business leaders came from upper-class or middle- class families and were white Protestants with colonial ancestors. It was not rare in northern cities for ambitious white boys (and even a few Negroes) to move upward into_the middle class. In a study of eight thousand Boston residents between 1880 and 1963 the historian Stephan Themstrom found that "Fully forty per cent of the working class sons in Boston held middle class jobs of some kind by the end of their own careers." Sons of the unskilled and semiskilled workers fared as well as the sons of skilled workers. Furthermore, 25 to 30 percent of those who began as manual laborers moved up to the middle class. Both types of social and economic mobility continued at about the same rate throughout the whole eighty-year period. About 60 percent of the sons of unskilled or semiskilled workers moved into better positions than their fathers. If, as is likely, similar conditions existed in other cities, class lines were not tightly drawn in the 1880's, nor did they become tightly drawn later. The majority of city workers were finding opportunities. Boston Negroes seem to have been better off than those in other cities, where conditions were deteriorating. In Boston the number of Negroes was small, but doubled between 1865 and 1880. Discrimination against them was lowered. In 1866 two Negroes were elected to the state legislature; thereafter there were usually Negro officeholders, sometimes representing predominantly white districts. Most Negroes remained manual laborers, but a few were affluent. America Enters the Industrial Age 379 New waves of immigration. The chance to improve brought two new waves_of immigrants to the United States. The first wave reached a peak in 1882 with the arrival of 788,000 immigrants, primarily from Ireland, England, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. In the following years, immigration from northwestern Europe declined; industrialization in Germany and Scandinavia created new jobs in these countries more attractive to the people than the farms and city life of the New World. A second wave, beginning in the 1880's, brought immigrants from eastern and southern Europe. Italians, Poles, Czechs, Hungarians, and numerous other nationalities, trying to escape poverty and no longer prevented from leaving, began arriving in numbers that increased until 1910, The terrible persecution of Jews in Russia, beginning in 1881, sent many of them fleeing to the United States. Armenians and Syrians also came to escape oppression and massacre. Some fourteen million immigrants arrived between 1860 and 1900, compared with the earlier four million. They formed no larger a proportion of the population, but they had more trouble gaining acceptance because their cultures were more distant from American culture than those of the earlier immigrants. Those from eastern and southern Europe brought languages, customs, and religions different from those to which Americans were accustomed. Prejudice against Chinese laborers on the Pacific Coast was so great that Congress in 1882 passed legislation excluding them. Some Americans, fearful of the large numbers of immigrants arriving, favored closing the gates. Congress in 1897 passed a bill barring those who could not pass a literacy test, but President Grover Cleveland vetoed it. Until the 1920's American policy (except for Orientals) continued to be that expressed in the sonnet by Emma Lazarus inscribed on the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty when it was dedicated in New York Harbor in 1886: Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed, to me: I lift my lamp beside the golden door. Hester Street. New York City So many of the immigrants settled in cities that by 1900 four fifths of the population of Greater New York was either foreign-born or of foreign-born parentage. It contained twice as many Irish as Dublin, as many Germans as Hamburg, two and a half times as many Jews as Warsaw (at that time part of Russia), and half as many Italians as Naples. Unfortunately, most of these immigrants found themselves forced into the most menial employment and the most wretched living conditions. It was for-the-children of immigrants, who learned to speak English and, if fortunate, gained some education, that America became a land of opportunity. Urban civilization. Newcomers, whether they sailed past the Statue of Liberty to land at Castle Garden on the tip of Manhattan or came from the prairies into one of the railroad stations of Chicago, were dazzled by what they beheld. "Everything interested us," recalled the novelist Hamlin Garland of Chicago. "Nothing was commonplace, nothing was ugly to us." The streets were jammed with horse-cars, wagons, carriages, and pedestrians, and the buildings seemed to rise ever taller. The arc lights left the young architect Frank Lloyd Wright blinking with surprise when he arrived in Chicago, and he was equally astonished at the bridge he was on as it swung out to let by a tugboat pushing a huge barge. There were noisy slums, but also miles of middle-class homes full of previously unknown comforts, such as telephones and plumbing, and the ostentatious mansions of the rich. There were many cultural opportunities: schools, colleges, universities, symphony orchestras, opera companies, art galleries, museums, and libraries. Many of these were made possible by the philanthropy of the rich. Although the wages of the steel workers were low and the price of kerosene was high, Carnegie was helping build public libraries from coast to coast, and Rockefeller was giving millions to help establish the University of Chicago. The Centennial Exposition that opened the era and the Columbian Exposition that came near its end both displayed to throngs of visitors the glories of an industrial, urban culture. Machinery of every kind and description dominated the Centennial Exposition of 1876, in Philadelphia. Two devices that helped make modern business possible were on display: the typewriter and the telephone. The Women's Pavilion displayed the achievements of women in areas ranging from textile design to medicine. The work of the finest American artists from Gilbert Stuart to young Winslow Homer was on exhibit. The buildings which housed these exhibits, however, were nondescript. By contrast, the Columbian Exhibition at Chicago in 1893 was a tribute to city planning and neoclassic architectural design. An American modification of Gothic architecture, sometimes called Victorian Gothic, massive and over- ornamented, had been popular. The architects of the Chicago World's Fair, however, went back to the ancient Greeks for inspiration. Like an idealized Athens, the Fair's white buildings rose around formal lagoons filled with splashing fountains. To the disgust of the most original architect of the period, Louis Sullivan, who considered the buildings mere copies, the neoclassical style impressed the American people. The Fair buildings fixed a classic mold upon the construction of public buildings for a generation to come; the floodlighting at night marked the triumph of electricity. Visitors were dazzled. Hamlin Garland urged his parents on their Dakota farm, "Sell the cook stove if necessary and come. You must see this fair." All through the summer of 1893 congresses of scientists, scholars, and clergymen met at the Chicago fair. It seemed to symbolize the coming to maturity of urban civilization. Immigrants in Chicago 382 The Growing Industrial Giant 1. Examine the descriptions of the Illinois families. What was each family's biggest expense? How much was spent for enrichment or entertainment? Did the children go to school? What kind of life did each family lead? 2. In what ways were the conditions of the workingman better or worse as a result of industrialization? 3. How much social mobility existed in the industrial society of this period? 4 What was the government s policy toward immigration at the turn of the century? How did the second wave of immigrants who arrived at this time differ from the earlier wave of immigrants? 5. What new comforts and opportunities did urban life afford? To some, however, on the surface the emerging civilization seemed garish. Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition. 1876 The Metropolitan Museum o( Art Mark Twain satirized it as "the Gilded Age" and the name stuck, symbolizing all that was showy and imitative in the period. The Gilded Age was also, however, an age of notable intellectual and cultural achievement. The base of this achievement was free public education, which became widespread. Elementary education became commonplace, and high school education became more available, especially in the Northeast. There had been only one hundred public high schools in 1860; by 1900 there were six thousand, with an enrollment of about 200,000. Elementary education was still little more than rote learning enforced by teachers, mostly young women who were themselves poorly educated. Their average annual salary in 1900 was $325. High schools, on the other hand, were becoming responsive to the business civilization, and were offering more instruction in chemistry, physics, and mathematics. Private trade and industrial schools were being established to provide shop courses for future factory technicians. Colleges and universities began to abandon the rote learning which had bound them before the Civil War. Both the older established institutions and the new state universities began to offer programs extending beyond general classical education: law, sciences, medicine, engineering, architecture, education, journalism, and, finally, business. Johns Hopkins University in 1876 began concentrating upon graduate training. Other universities began offering work toward the Ph D. degree, but many students still went to Europe to obtain a doctorate. The best American scholars. A Progressive Age 469 servants for their estates and laborers for their factories at low wages. To some degree their wealth was based upon the poverty of others. For some years reformers who were to be in the forefront of the social justice movement had been trying to alleviate poverty and its related problems: starvation wages, child labor, long working hours, needless industrial accidents, and slum living conditions. There were thirty-eight state laws prohibiting child labor, but these applied usually only to those under twelve, and they did not apply to labor in fields, canneries, or (often) in textile mills. Twenty percent of all boys and ten percent of all girls between ten and fifteen years of age were employed, some of them for as much as sixteen hours a day at dangerous occupations. Few laws requiring safety devices were adequate or effectively enforced, and until 1911 there were almost no state laws to provide compensation for injured or killed workmen. There were no old age benefits or unemployment insurance—in short, no social security program. Meager savings from low wages were a family's only protection from these hazards. It was not surprising that so many children had to start work young in order to help provide for families in distress. Cheap labor for the low-paying occupations was coming in a flood from Europe and in a trickle from the South. In the single year 1905, 1,250,000 immigrants arrived; 72 percent of them during 470 America Enters the Twentieth Century these years came from southern and eastern Europe. Many of them were Jews escaping the persecution of the Russian government; many of these Jews went into the garment industry. Many Italians and Slavs filled backbreaking jobs in the cities, the steel mills, and the mines. Thousands of Negroes were coming north each year, getting the lowest- paid, most precarious jobs. They lived * wretchedly in the cities' slums. Reformers tried to help these newcomers to the cities by finding them better housing and jobs and by "Americanizing" the Europeans. Many reformers, joined by conservatives and labor union leaders, also tried to restrict immigration. A "gentleman's agreement" negotiated with Japan in 1907 ended the migration of Japanese agricultural laborers into California. Congress passed laws barring several types of undesirables, including ex-convicts and alcoholics. Over President Woodrow Wilson's veto it imposed a literacy test in 1917 on arriving immigrants. Slum living conditions worried the reformers. They were shocked by Jacob Riis' book How the Other Half Lives. Riis was a Danish immigrant who had become a police reporter and a friend of Theodore Roosevelt. His writing brought housing legislation and the clearing away of some of the very worst of the New York slum blocks. Still, conditions he described in 1890 continued to exist: Long ago it was said that "one half of the world does not know how the other half lives. . . To-day three-fourths of [New York's] people live in tenements, and the nineteenth century drift of the population to the cities is sending ever-increasing multitudes to crowd them. .. . To-day, what is a tenement? ... In its narrower sense the typical tenement was thus described when last arraigned before the bar of public justice: "It is generally a brick building from four to six stories high on the street, frequently with a store on the first floor . .. four families occupy each floor, and a set of rooms consists of one or two dark closets, used as bedrooms, with a living room twelve feet by ten. The staircase is too often a dark well in the centre of the house, and no direct through ventilation is possible, each family being separated from the other by partitions. Frequently the rear of the lot is occupied by another building of three stories high with two families on a floor. . . ." It no longer excites even passing attention, when the sanitary police report counting 101 adults and 91 children in a Crosby Street house, one of twins, built together. The children in the other, if I am not mistaken, numbered 89, a total of 180. Most of the new urban dwellers, whether from Europe or the South, flocked to the cities for similar reasons. Are the reasons which now draw people to the cities the same as in the early 1900's? A Progressive Age 471 two tenements! Or when a midnight inspection in Mulberry Street unearths a hundred and fifty "lodgers" sleeping on filthy floors in two buildings. Earning a living was difficult indeed, and reforms in working conditions sometimes brought additional threats. Hutchins Hapgood, in The Spirit of the Ghetto (1902), summarized a sketch by S. Libin, a writer for Yiddish newspapers, on the effect of a new law limiting clothing workers to a ten-hour day in the sweatshop and forbidding them to do work at home: The tailor goes home earlier than usual that night, about ten o'clock, with the customary bundle of clothes for his wife and children to work over. He is tired, distressed and irritated at the thought of the law. He finds his wife and ten-year-old daughter half asleep, as usual, but yet sewing busily. They, too, are pale and tired, and near them on the lounge is a sleeping baby; on the floor another. The little girl tries to hide her drowsiness from her father, and works more busily than ever. "Why are you back so early?" asks his wife. "Pretty soon," he replies morosely, "I'll be back still earlier." "Is work slack again?" she asks, her cheek growing paler, "It's another trouble, not that," he says. "It's a new law, a bitter law." To his little daughter he adds: "Sleep, child, you will soon have time to sleep all day." His ignorant wife does not understand. "A new law? What is that? What does it mean?" she asks. "It means that I can work only ten hours a day." Then they calculate how much money he can make in ten hours. Now he works nineteen hours, and they have nothing to spare. . .. (S]he begins to weep. The little girl is overjoyed at the thought that she will no longer have to work, but tries to conceal her pleasure. The laborer, moved by his wife's tears, endeavors to comfort her. "Ah," he says, "it's only a law! Two years ago there was one like it, but the work went on just the same." The plight of the immigrant tailor was made worse by other changes, some of which took place within the family. A gulf rapidly developed between the older generation that had come from Europe, clinging to the ways and language of the old country, and the new American generation. Hapgood noted the effect among the Jews: With his entrance into the public school the little fellow runs plump against a system of education and a set of influences which are at total variance with those traditional to his race and with his home life. The religious element is entirely lacking. . . . English becomes his most familiar language. . , . The orthodox Jewish influences, still at work upon him, are rapidly weakened. He grows to look upon the ceremonial life at home as rather ridiculous. His old parents, who speak no English, he regards as "green- horns." . , . The orthodox parents begin to see that the boy, in order to "get along" in the New World, must receive a Gentile training. Instead of hoping to make a rabbi out of him, they reluctantly consent to his becoming an American businessman, or, still better, an American doctor or lawyer... . An important circumstance in helping to determine the boy's attitude toward his father is the tendency to reverse the ordinary and normal educational and economical relations existing between father and son. In Russia the father gives the son an education and supports him until his marriage. . . . The father is, therefore, the head of the household in reality. But in the New World the boy contributes very early to the family's support. The father is in this country less able to make 472 America Enters the Twentieth Century an economic place for himself than is the son. The little fellow sells papers, blacks boots, and becomes a street merchant on a small scale. As he speaks English, and his parents do not, he is commonly the interpreter in business transactions, and tends generally to take things into his own hands. There is a tendency, therefore, for the father to respect the son. The children of immigrants had to battle their way on the streets and in the schools, putting up with insults to their nationality, or even being forced to fight children who lived on other streets: The East Side [of New York], for children, was a world plunged in eternal war. It was suicide to walk into the next block. Each block was a separate nation, and when a strange boy appeared, the patriots swarmed. "What Streeter?" was demanded, furiously. "Chrystie Street," was the trembling reply. Bang! This was the signal for a mass assault on the unlucky foreigner, with sticks, stones, fists and feet. These living conditions were not confined to the big cities of the East and the Middle West. In the South there was the grim rural poverty of some whites and most Negroes, in the Southwest the poverty of American Indians and of increasing numbers of Spanish-speaking Indians who were brought in from Mexico. Social workers in Los Angeles, a growing city of 200,000, complained that the adobe pueblos in the center of the city, once the comfortable homes of the Spanish-speaking Californians, had become wretched dwellings for the Mexicans: The railroads have needed gangs of men in their construction of new lines and have gone down in Mexico and brought up whole trainloads of men with their families. ... The men in coming expect high wages and a return trip. But they soon find that a dollar a day is all that is paid, and moreover that that will not support a large family even in these [shacks]. Work is not steady, and for the man who cannot speak English there is no other job. Discouragement comes, and often the small earnings are drunk up in the ever- handy saloons. Stabbing affrays frequently follow, then the police station and the chain gang. . . . Meanwhile the railroads have sent to Mexico for more laborers! . . . The rent exacted for the wretched homes .. . is of course exorbitant, as in all congested quarters. The people, not knowing English nor the necessity for sanitation (they are mostly from the rural districts), flock together wherever they may find shelter. The lowest rent is four dollars a month for a one-room shack that would not bring that price as kindling wood. With this goes the privilege of water from an outside common faucet, and the use of a toilet in common with three to a dozen other families. When the heavy rains come in winter, imagine those shacks and tents that have no floors! Sick women lie on damp mattresses which are embedded in mud. Through the crazy roof and side walls water pours in at many points, and the household stays wet till the sun shines again. Fortunately the sun is usually shining in Los Angeles. The beginnings of Negro migration to the North were already attracting attention. Washington, D.C., was the largest Negro city in the world, the Negro population of New York had grown to 70,000, and Chicago's Negro population had increased to 35,000. The state of Maryland made a detailed study of the 81,000 Negroes in Baltimore forty years after the abolition of slavery. It was found that almost 7,000 had been born in slavery, almost 14,000 could neither read nor write, and more than a third of the 486 America Enters the Twentieth Century the issues of silver and imperialism (in which he thought the Republicans were right) had nevertheless: . . . tended to throw the party into the hands not merely of the conservatives but of the reactionaries; of men who, sometimes for personal and improper reasons, but more often with entire sincerity and uprightness of purpose, distrusted anything that was progressive and dreaded radicalism. These men still from force of habit applauded what Lincoln had done in the way of radical dealing with the abuses of his day; but they did not apply the spirit in which Lincoln worked to the abuses of their own day. Both houses of Congress were controlled by these men. . . . 1 made a resolute effort to get on with [Can- non, Aldrich, and Senator Eugene Hale of Maine] and with their followers, and I have no question that they made an equally resolute effort to get on with me. We succeeded in working together, although with increasing friction, for some years, I pushing forward and they hanging back. Gradually, however, I was forced to abandon the effort to persuade them to come my way, and then I achieved results only by appealing over the heads of the Senate and House leaders to the people, who were the masters of both of us. 1 continued in this way to get results until almost the close of my term; and the Republican party became once more the progressive and indeed the fairly radical progressive party of the nation Relations with Congress were only one aspect of Roosevelt's broad interpretation of the role of President: My view was that every executive officer and above all every executive officer in high position, was a steward of the people bound actively and affirmatively to do all he could for the people, and not to content himself with the negative merit of keeping his talents undamaged in a napkin. 1 declined to adopt the view that what was imperatively necessary for the nation could not be done by the President unless he could find some specific authorization to do it. My belief was that it was not only his right but his duty to do anything that the needs of the nation demanded unless such action was forbidden by the Constitution or by the laws. Under this interpretation of executive power I did and caused to be done many things not previously done by the President and the heads of the departments. I did not usurp power, but I did greatly broaden the use of executive power. In other words, I acted for the public welfare, I acted for the common well-being of all our people, whenever and in whatever manner was necessary, unless prevented by direct constitutional or legislative prohibition. I did not care a rap for the mere form and show of power; 1 cared immensely for the use that could be made of the substance. Senator La Follette in his Autobiography. also published in 1913, titled a chapter "Alone in the Senate." He described both the isolation forced on him by the conservative leaders and the circumstances that "sometimes rendered it impossible for President Roosevelt and myself to cooperate on important legis- lation": He acted upon the maxim that half a loaf is better than no bread. I believe that half a loaf is fatal whenever it is accepted at the sacrifice of the basic principle sought to be attained. Half a loaf, as a rule, dulls the appetite, and destroys the keenness of interest in attaining the full loaf. A halfway measure never fairly tests the principle and may utterly discredit it It is certain to weaken, disappoint, and dissipate public interest. Concession and compromise are almost always necessary in legislation, but they call for the most thorough and complete mastery of the principles involved, in order to fix the * Did Roosevelt mean he would not hesitate to bend the law to achieve his ends? What evidence in this chapter proves this to be true? To what extent in each case did Roosevelt serve the ultimate good of the people? Progressive Foreign Policy 521 took drastic action when one of the officers of the conservative government arrested several United States sailors. The American admiral secured their release, but demanded an apology which was not forthcoming. By coincidence, a ship carrying arms from Germany to the conservatives was about to reach port. To keep the arms from reaching the conservatives, as well as to act in reprisal, the President ordered the Navy to seize Vera Cruz. The Navy captured the port with considerable loss of Mexican and American lives. At this point Argentina, Brazil, and Chile offered mediation, which Wilson, dismayed by the number of casualties, gratefully accepted. While the mediation negotiations dragged on, constitutionalist forces in Mexico overthrew the conservative government and made Venustiano Carranza president. Although Carranza fell short of President Wilson's ideal, Wilson made no effort to depose him. Another Mexican revolutionary general, Francisco ("Pancho") Villa, was so angry at Wilson's acceptance of Carranza that he tried to start a war with the United States. Villa first shot sixteen Americans whom he captured on a Mexican train. When that did not bring intervention, in March, 1916, he destroyed Columbus, New Mexico, just across the border in the United States, and murdered nineteen additional Americans. Wilson called the National Guard into active service and ordered Brigadier General John ). Pershing to track down Villa. The expedition chased Villa three hundred miles into Mexico without catching him, and war with Mexico almost followed. Again Wilson compromised. In 1917 he withdrew the troops and recognized the Carranza government. Slowly, stability returned to Mexico, but it was nearly a decade before Mexican resentment against the United States subsided. President Wilson was more skillful in meeting a serious threat of war with Japan in the spring of 1913. Japan resented a law in California forbidding aliens (including Japanese immigrant farmers) from owning land. Wilson could not make California repeal its law; but in the belief that Japan did not really want war, he told the Navy not to engage in any fleet movements that might seem threatening. Wilson kept on trying to negotiate until the excitement died down. When war broke out in Europe in the summer of 1914, Wilson feared that the European powers would now allow Japan to expand freely in East Asia, and tried to keep the power balance. Japan did declare war upon Germany and seized the German-leased territory on the Shantung Peninsula of China. Japan then tried to force China to sign a treaty which would have made it little more than a Japanese protectorate. In 1915, however, the United States and Great Britain forced Japan to withdraw these demands. As Japanese efforts to dominate China continued, the best the United States could do was to negotiate the Lansing-lshii agreement of November, 1917, in which Japan promised to respect the independence of China and the Open Door policy, while the United States conceded that Japan had "special interests in China." This was an unsatisfactory arrangement, but American officials hoped it would at least preserve Chinese independence until the World War was over. After August, 1914, the menace of the World War shadowed all foreign relations of the United States. 1. What were Roosevelt s policies toward Asia and Europe? How did he try to carry out these policies? 2. Should the United States have become involved in the conflict in Mexico? 3. How successful was Wilson in curtailing Japan's ambitions in China? The outbreak of major war among the European countries in the summer of 1914 came as a shock to the American people. They had been aware of the arms race among European nations and the endless quarrels, but these alarms went on so long that they were no longer taken seriously. When Serbians assassinated the Archduke of Austria in June, 1914, and Austria-Hungary declared war on July 28, the news did not seem sensational. What was incredible was that most of the nations in the European power blocs joined one side or another, mobilized, and issued declarations of war. Serbia was backed by Russia, and Russia by France. Austria-Hungary was backed by Germany. When Germany invaded neutral Belgium en route to France, Great Britain came into war on the French side. By August 5 all these nations were at war. From the outset the sympathies of Americans were more with England and France, especially because of the harsh way German troops had invaded previously neutral Belgium and imposed a cruel occupation. No one had any idea how long and bloody a war it was to be, especially during the first hectic weeks when armies were moving so fast that it looked as though it might end either with the Russian sack of Berlin or with the 542 Crusade in Europe and Foretaste of Abundance "a man is a man." More than 300,000 Negroes moved northward or westward, sending the black population soaring in New York, Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit. The Negro population of New York increased 66 percent to 152,000; in Detroit, 611 percent to 40,000. Negro men and women obtained work in most of the booming war industries of the North; many men worked on railroads or in mines. The rush to the factories created a shortage of farm labor, especially in the South and the West. At first southern whites had welcomed the exodus, but when it deprived them of men to work in the cotton fields and women to work as household servants, they became hostile and threatening to those waiting to take trains north. In the West, where migrant agricultural labor was badly needed, the main solution was to invite in Mexicans, since immigration from Japan and China had been stopped. In 1917, immigration officials were ordered to ignore regulations making it difficult for Mexican workers to cross the border, and within three years the number of Mexicans in the United States had doubled. Prejudice against working women broke down under wartime necessity. Psychologists had asserted that women had only 60 percent of the strength of men, possessed few skills that could be used in factories, and could not be supervisors, since "women won't work for women" and men would not take orders from them. As women moved into war work, they proved all these ideas wrong, and indeed seemed superior to men at certain kinds of tasks. This change in the role of women had a lasting effect which the war's end could not change. American attitudes and lives were also affected in less direct ways by participation in the war. The government worked vigorously to "sell" Americans on the war and to obtain voluntary cooperation and conformity. In order to convince Americans that they were involved in a worthy cause, the Committee on Public Information was created under a progressive newspaperman, George Creel. He persuaded newspapers to engage in voluntary self-censorship and to publish information which would make Americans excited and enthusiastic about their part in the war. Although the approach of the Committee was positive and constructive, many private efforts to promote the war tried to arouse hatred for the other side. Unfortunately, it was much easier to anger people with stories of German atrocities than it was to stimulate their enthusiastic support for President Wilson's idealistic war aims. There was a negative side to marshaling American enthusiasm for the war. Some Americans under the pressure of war hysteria committed small and petty actions and regarded German-Americans with suspicion and dislike. In some cities and areas the study of German was banned in the schools and German books were removed from the public libraries. Some symphony orchestras removed music by German composers from their repertory. The government not only tried to encourage support of the war effort but also tried to suppress dissent. Congress passed several laws dealing sternly with objectors to the war. State laws in some instances even went beyond congressional legislation, In some cases socialists and other left-wing opponents of the war were prosecuted for their statements and sentenced to long prison terms. The total number was not large, but the punishments were drastic. Altogether, eleven persons were sentenced to 10 years, six to 15 years, and twenty-four to 20 years. In addition, in Chicago twenty-three members of the IWW were sentenced to 10 years in prison, and sixteen to 20 years. Some Americans were disturbed by the changes in their lives that the war had brought. Prices rose and strangers moved into their factories and neighborhoods. They felt they were paying heavily for the war, and they wanted the benefits of victory. They were scarcely ready to support Wilson's urging for an idealistic peace. 1. What demands did the needs of the Allied powers place on the United States? How successful was the American response to each need? 2. Did domestic policies during World War I fulfill the demands of the progressives? 3. Was it necessary to create government organizations to direct mobilization? How did each organization work? 4. How accurate were Wilson s premonitions on the effect of the war on the American people? Meanwhile Americans thrilled to the achievements of the Navy and the Army. From the moment of American entrance the war became the immediate and acute responsibility of the United States Navy. At the same time that the Germans were overrunning northern France, it seemed quite possible that the Germans could starve the British people by disrupting shipping with their submarines. Germans were sinking ships faster than they could be built. If the Allies were to be saved, a bridge of ships must be built across the Atlantic. The American Navy provided two essentials. First, it had a large number of warships to combat the submarines. AU its destroyers were sent to Queenstown, Ireland, to work with the British on antisubmarine patrols. By July, 1917, 35 The 1920's: A Foretaste of Abundance 561 they had experienced during the war in the armed forces in Europe or in war industries in the North. Now that the war was over, southern whites tried to force them back to subservience by threats and lynchings, and northern mobs tried to force them out of factories and their new homes in the cities. The Ku Klux Klan was revived in both South and North. By 1919 it had a membership of 100,000 and was directed not only against Negroes but also against Catholics, Jews, and immigrants. Anti-Negro riots broke out in twenty-six cities and towns in 1919, continued for thirteen days in Chicago, and left many Negroes dead, injured, or homeless. Black separatism and nationalism Courtesy. Chicago Historical Sorim. John F Wdd. photographer seemed the only way out. A great number became followers of a Jamaican, Marcus Garvey. "Provisional President of the African Republic" Garvey argued that Negroes could advance in a society of white racists only with black support of Negro businesses within the United States and the ultimate return of Negroes to their African homeland. The Negro must, Garvey declared, create "a distinct racial type of civilization of his own and ... work out his salvation in his mother- land." Many thousands of Negroes, most of them people who had recently left the South to migrate northward, joined his movement, parading in the blue and red uniforms of the African Legion or the white dress of the Black Cross Nurses and purchasing stock in Garvey's Black Star Steamship Line. W. E. B. Du Bois and the NAACP attacked Garvey. The Federal government prosecuted him on charges of using the mails to defraud, since he had mismanaged his supporters' investments in the Black Star Line. Garvey was convicted in 1923, imprisoned, and later deported, but black nationalism persisted. Americans in general tried to remain outside the conflicts with which the postwar period began. The problems of the workers and the violence used against them to put down strikes, the denial of basic civil rights to people who believed in communism or socialism, and increasing discrimination against Negro Americans were ignored by those not directly involved. People were tired of intervention overseas and progressive crusades at home. They wanted to forget about 562 Crusade in Europe and foretaste of Abundance national and international problems and get their share of the general prosperity that rising prices seemed to offer. With the promise of prosperity in mind they voted in the conservative "New Era" of the Harding administration. 1. In what ways did World War I affect American life in 1919-1920? 2. Did labor react to these conditions? Why? 3. How did fear and wartime psychology affect the positions taken by Attorney General Palmer and the Supreme Court on radicalism? 4. What groups were the victims of the postwar conservative reaction? Why? Marcus Garvey The appeal of the handsome, conservative Republican candidate in the election of 1920 was his promise to restore "normalcy." Harding assured the voters that he would avoid American interventions overseas and the issues progressives had raised about the responsibilities of the government at home. In one of his most notable speeches, given in May, 1920, before he received the Presidential nomination, Harding declared: America's present need is not heroics, but healing; not nostrums, but normalcy; not revolution, but restoration; not agitation, but adjustment; not surgery, but serenity; not the dramatic, but the dispassionate; not experiment, but equipoise; not submergence in internationality, but sustainment in triumphant nationality.. .. This republic has its ample tasks. If we put an end to false economics which lure humanity to utter chaos, ours will be the commanding example of world leadership today. . . . The world needs to be reminded that all human ills are not curable by legislation, and that quantity of statutory enactment and excess of government offer no substitute for quality of citizenship. Harding's rejection of governmental responsibilities both overseas and at home was popular. Although he was regarded as a relatively weak person, his election over Democratic candidate James Cox, a mild progressive, was a foregone conclusion. Though there were still progressives in the Republican party, they were a decided minority. The government regulation which progressives had worked for was identified in the 564 Crusade in Europe and Foretaste of Abundance more ships than all the admirals of the world have sunk in a cycle of centuries." The spirit of Hughes's proposal was carried out to some degree by the Treaty of Washington of 1922, which provided that the United States and Great Britain should limit their fleets to approximately 500,000 tons each and that Japan (whose territories covered less area) should limit its fleet to 300,000 tons. (France and Italy, which also participated, were to balance their fleets at 175,000 tons each.) Two further treaties helped to ease tensions in the Pacific. The Four-Power Pact (signed by the United States, Great Britain, France, and Japan) guaranteed that the four nations would respect each other's island holdings in the Pacific. The Nine-Power Pact supported the open-door policy in China, so that Japan gave up the special rights on the Shantung Peninsula that she had wrested from Germany and withdrew her troops from Siberia. American naval experts were critical of the Washington Conference, but it did temporarily end the dangerous rivalry in the Pacific between the United States and Japan. Both nations were more or less still equally powerful and had no reason to fear attack from each other. Unfortunately, the good results of the conference were marred in 1924 when Congress refused to allow even a small immigrant quota to the Japanese. This action ended the United States' Gentle- men's Agreement of 1907 with Japan in which the Japanese government promised not to give passports to laborers wishing to come to the United States. This change in American policy was regarded as a serious insult throughout Japan and was an ill omen for the future. Officially, the Harding administration seemed isolated from European questions. Secretary Hughes went only as far as allowing observers at League conferences and American participation in minor matters involving no commitments. Because of its economic involvement, however, the United States was inextricably tied to European political developments. Since the United States was not a member of the League of Nations, it could not use its influence to keep Allied demands for reparations from Germany (compensation for war damages) from reaching huge totals. At the same time, the American people wanted the Allies to repay the ten billion dollars the United States had loaned them during World War I. The Allies depended on German reparations payments for money with which to pay back their debt to the United States. Germany, however, was suffering from runaway inflation and seemed unable to make payments. Two American experts — a Chicago banker, Charles G. Dawes, and the head of the General Electric Company, Owen D. Young — privately developed schemes to stabilize German finances and to loan enough money to Germany so that it could begin making reparations payments. By 1929, German reparations had been scaled down to two billion dollars. Between 1923 and 1930 the system of payments (not officially recognized by the United States government) worked in the following way: 1) American private citizens loaned The 1920's: A Foretaste of Abundance 565 $2,500,000,000 to German cities, states, and corporations; 2) Germany paid the former Allies about $2,000,000,000 in reparations; 3) and the former Allies paid the United States about $2,600,000,000 on their war debts. As long as American loans and prosperity continued, the scheme could work. If the American loans stopped, however, the former Allies could not keep up their war-debt payments because they did not have enough gold. The Allies were forced to pay the United States in gold because America's high tariff wall made it difficult to obtain dollars by selling goods in the United States. The Harding administration not only continued to raise new high tariff barriers against European goods but also restricted the immigration of European workers. In the spring of 1921 Republicans voted in an emergency tariff, and in 1922 it was followed by the high Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act. Other countries raised their tariffs in return, so that the world seemed to be moving toward economic nationalism. During the years of prosperity in the 1920's American foreign trade flourished in spite of the high tariff, because large private American loans gave other countries the dollars they needed to purchase American goods. The immigration restrictions marked a great change in American policy and almost closed the gates through which millions of foreigners had come to establish themselves in the United States. The flood of immigrants had resumed immediately after the war, and 800,000 arrived in the year ending June, 1921. Many groups were pressuring to stop immigration. Racists considered these immigrants (predominantly from eastern and southern Europe) inferior; conservatives feared that they might bring revolutionary ideas with them; workers opposed immigrant competition for their jobs. Others felt that the immigrants were not being Americanized and that the "melting pot" was not working. The evidence shows how large a component of American society the immigrants really were; at the beginning of the 1920's a third of the population was either foreign-born or had at least one foreign-born parent. The role of immigrants in American industry is illustrated by a poster displayed during a strike in 1919. Under a picture of Uncle Sam it said: Go back to work! Ritomate al lavoro! Wracajcie do pracy! Griz kite prie darbo! ldite natragna posao! Chodte nazad do roboty! Menjenek vissza a munkaba! Congress passed emergency legislation in 1921 reducing the number of immigrants to about 300,000 for the following year. Quotas were set at 3 percent of the number of foreign-born persons of each nationality living in the United States based on the census of 1910. In 1924 Congress voted in the National Origins Act, which limited the number of immigrants to 164,000 per year. This act altered the quotas to 2 percent of the people of a given nationality in the United States at the time of the 1890 census. Why does it seem easier for some immigrants and minority groups to become Americanized than for others? What does it mean to be an "American"? Are all minority groups willing to lose their identities to become Americans? How might it be possible to retain an inherited identity and still become Americanized? The immigration legislation of the 1920's represents a permanent and drastic change in the immigration policy of the United States. Read the following excerpts about immigration and the two tables of figures from the 1910 and 1890 censuses. Analyze these carefully. What changes took place in immigration policy? What seem to be the aims of the immigration legislation? What national groups (other than Asians, who were barred completely) were discriminated against by the legislation? 1. Inscription on the Statue of Liberty: Give me your tired, your poor, Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door. 2. Treaty of November 17, 1880, between the United States and China: ,.. Whenever in the opinion of the Government of the United States, the coming of Chinese laborers to the United States, or their residence therein, affects or threatens to affect the interest of that country, or to endanger the good order of the said country or of any locality within the territory thereof, the Government of China agrees that the government of the United States may regulate, limit, or suspend such coming or residence, but may not absolutely prohibit it.... 3. An act to execute certain treaty stipulations relating to Chinese (May 6,1882): Whereas, in the opinion of the Government of the United States the coming of Chinese laborers to this country endangers the good order of certain localities within the territory thereof: Therefore. Be it enacted. That from and after the expiration of ninety days next after the passage of this act, the coming of Chinese laborers to the United States be . .. suspended; and during such suspension it shall not be lawful for any Chinese laborer to come, or having so come after the expiration of said ninety days, to remain within the United States. Sec. 15. That the words "Chinese laborers," whenever used in this act, shall be construed to mean both skilled and unskilled laborers and Chinese employed in mining. 4. Report of the Commissioner of Immigration, 1908: ... an understanding was reached with Japan that the existing policy of discouraging emigration of its subjects of the laboring classes to continental United States should be continued, and should, by co-operation with the governments, be made as effective as possible. This understanding con templates that the Japanese government shall issue passports to continental United States only to such of its subjects as are non-labor- ers or are laborers who, in coming to the continent seek to resume a formerly acquired domicile, to join a parent, wife, or children residing there, or to assume active control of an already possessed interest in a farming enterprise... so that the three classes of laborers entitled to receive passports have come to be designated "former residents," "parents, wives, or children of residents," and "settled agriculturists." 5. Report of the Commissioner-General of Immigration, 1923: The immigration act of 1882... provided for the exclusion from the United States of the following classes only: Convicts, lunatics, idiots, and persons likely to become a public charge. This law underwent more or less important revisions in 1891, 1893, 1903, The 1920's: A Foretaste of Abundance 567 1907, and 1917, until the last-mentioned act, which is the present general immigration law, denies admission to many classes of aliens including the following: Idiots, imbeciles, feeble-minded persons, epileptics, insane persons: persons who have had one or more attacks of insanity at any time previously: persons of constitutional psychopathic inferiority; persons with chronic alcoholism; paupers; professional beggars; vagrants; persons afflicted with tuberculosis in any form or with a loathsome or dangerous contagious disease;.. . persons who have been convicted of or admit having committed a felony or other crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; polygamists, or persons who practice polygamy; anarchists and similar classes; immoral persons and persons coming for an immoral purpose; contract laborers;.. . persons who are natives of certain geographically defined territory; aliens over 16 years of age who are unable to read some language or dialect.... In December 1920 the House of Representatives, with little opposition, passed a bill to suspend practically all immigration for the time being. The percent limit plan was substituted by the Senate ... but it failed to become a law at the time because President Wilson withheld executive approval. Nevertheless, favorable action was not long delayed, for at a special session called at the beginning of the present administration the measure was quickly enacted, and, with President Harding's approval, became a law on May 19, 1921. This law expired by limitation June 30, 1922, but by the act of May 11, 1922, its life was extended to June 30, 1924, and some strengthening amendments were added. The principal provisions of the per centum limit act, or the "quota law," as it is popularly known, are as follows: The number of aliens of any nationality who may be admitted to the United States in any fiscal year shall not exceed 3 per cent of the number of persons of such nationality who were resident in the United States according to the census of 1910. Monthly quotas are limited to [no more than] 20 per cent of the annual quota. For the purpose of the act, "nationality" is determined by country of birth. The quota limit law is in addition to and not in substitution for the provisions of the immigration law. 6. An act to limit the immigration of aliens to the United States and for other purposes: The annual quota of any nationality shall be two per centum of the number of foreign born individuals of such nationality resident in the continental United States as determined by the United States census of 1890, but the minimum quota of any nationality shall be 100. ... After July 1, 1927 the annual quota of any nationality ,.. shall be a number which bears the same ratio to 150,000 as the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920 having that national origin bears to the number of inhabitants in continental United States in 1920, but the minimum quota of any nationality shall be 100. 7. The McCarran Immigration Act, 1952: Sec. 201(a) The annual quota of any quota area shall be one-sixth of 1 per centum of the number of inhabitants in the continental United Stales in 1920, which number, except for the purpose of computing quotas for the quota areas within the Asia-Pacific triangle, shall be the same number heretofore determined under the provisions of section 11 of the Immigration Act of 1924. attributable by national origin to such quota area: Provided, That the quota existing tor Chinese persons prior to the date of enactment of this act shall be continued, and, except as otherwise provided in section 202 (e), the minimum quota for any quota area shall be one hundred. 568 Crusade in Europe and Foretaste of Abundance Total European-born population in United States. 1910. 11,791,841 — Present law quota, 357,803" The immigration legislation had an effect which the International Labor Office had predicted at the time: With the doors almost closed, education is expected gradually to destroy the obstacles which language and illiteracy have hitherto raised . . . and so to produce in time a homogeneous working population seeking the same objectives and the same standard of well-being. A more immediate effect was to accelerate the migration from the rural South to the North, especially among Negroes. Three million people moved north during the 1920's. The Department of Labor estimated that between 1921 and 1924 over 475,000 Negroes left the South, an even higher number than during World War I. Since immigrants could still enter the United States from other countries in Calvin Coolidge the Western Hemisphere, 900,000 Canadians (many of them French-speaking) and a half-million Mexicans arrived during the 1920's. These immigrants provided inexpensive labor for American businessmen in factories and for farmers in their fields. Businessmen seemed to be the ones to benefit from Harding's program, but they were to be even more pleased with the policies of his successor, Calvin Coolidge. When Harding came into office, the nation was suffering from a postwar depression, and business did not begin to boom until 1923. Harding received an excellent press and was portrayed as an effective President, but behind the facade he was worried that some of the people he had appointed to political office were corrupt. When Harding ordered one of these men out of Washington, the man committed suicide. The country did not learn about these scandals fully until after Harding's death. In the summer of 1923 the President, depressed and not in good health, took a trip to Alaska. He became seriously ill in Seattle upon his return, and died of a heart attack in San Francisco, making Calvin Coolidge President. Harding was mourned. However, so much fraud was uncovered in the months that followed that, although he was clearly not personally involved, Harding's reputation fell. The most publicized of the scandals ultimately sent Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall to a Federal penitentiary. Fall was convicted of accepting large bribes from heads of two oil companies to lease to them undeveloped oil fields held in reserve for the Navy at Elk need. Roosevelt would have liked to cut off the flow of arms to japan and to join other countries in an arms embargo. Roosevelt's conflicting desires to keep the United States out of war and to join other nations in restraining aggressors found expression in a major address delivered at Chicago in October, 1937. He spoke primarily about Japan, but also about Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, which were frightening peoples of other countries: It seems to be unfortunately true that the epidemic of world lawlessness is spreading. When an epidemic of physical disease starts to spread, the community approves and joins in a quarantine of the patients in order to protect the health of the community against the spread of the disease. . . . War is a contagion, whether it be declared or undeclared. It can engulf states and peoples remote from the original scene of hostilities. We are determined to keep out of war, yet we cannot insure ourselves against the disastrous effects of war and the dangers of involvement. We are adopting such measures as will minimize our risk of involvement, but we cannot have complete protection in a world of disorder in which confidence and security have broken down.. . . America hates war. America hopes for peace. Therefore, America actively engages in the search for peace. What Roosevelt meant by "quarantining" aggressors seems to have been no more than collective action to break off diplomatic relations, but he sent a wave of alarm across the country. There was such an uproar of protest against the speech that Roosevelt beat a hasty retreat. Two months later, when Japanese aviators bornbed and sank the United (even though an American flag was painted on the deck), the reaction was the reverse of that which had greeted the sinking of the Maine in 1898; people only feared involvement. Roosevelt accepted Japanese apologies and their promise of payment. The threat of war in Europe overshadowed the critical relations with Japan. In Germany, Hitler had wiped out every vestige of opposition and had harassed and oppressed its Jewish citizens. By 1938 he had built such a powerful army and air force that he was ready for external conquest. In March, 1938, he annexed Austria without bloodshed, thus surrounding western Czechoslovakia on three sides. Claiming to be the spokesman for the German minority in Czechoslovakia, Hitler brought pressure to have their sector annexed to Germany. He threatened war in September, 1938. Roosevelt joined other nations in pleading for a peaceful solution, but played States gunboat Pa nay on a Chinese river whit How could Roosevelt suggest an active policy of containment against aggression when the public opinion of the nation was so much against involvement? Is it the duty of a President to create or inspire public opinion that will support what he believes is the only correct policy? Would this be democratic? Does the President always know best? 682 The Struggle for Global Peace ing in 1940 and 1941, Negro leaders were determined to bring an end to the discrimination being shown against black workers and brought pressure upon President Roosevelt. A. Philip Randolph, head of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, headed the planning of a protest march on Washington, to be held on July 1, 1941. The threat of a march which would proclaim to the world disunity within the United States was sufficient to force President Roosevelt to take action. Previously he had argued to Walter White, the Secretary of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, that if he took action against discrimination "the South would rise up in protest." When it became clear that new definite concessions were necessary, Roosevelt on June 25, 1941, signed an Executive Order creating the Committee on Fair Employment Practice: 1. All departments and agencies of the Government of the United States concerned with vocational and training programs for defense production shall take special measures appropriate to assure that such programs are administered without discrimination because of race, creed, color, or national origin; 2. All contracting agencies of the Government of the United States shall include in all defense contracts hereafter negotiated by them a provision obligating the contractor not to discriminate against any worker because of race, creed, color, or national origin; 3. There is established in the Office of Production Management a Committee on Fair Employment Practice, which shall consist of a chairman and four other members to be appointed by the President. . . . The Committee shall receive and investigate complaints of discrimination in violation of the provisions of this order and shall take appropriate steps to redress grievances which it finds to be valid. . . . Although the FEPC had little real power, it helped persuade many employers to hire Negroes. Two million found work in war industries. Further, the Committee helped convince many Americans that freedom from discrimination in employment was a civil right to which every citizen was entitled. The movement of southern Negroes to war jobs in the North, where they often found themselves in close proximity to whites from southern farms, contributed to racial tensions. Chicago's black population grew by 100,000, that of Detroit by 60,000, that on the West World War II: The Home Front 683 Coast by 250,000. Destructive riots rocked Detroit and Harlem; in Detroit, twenty-five Negroes and nine whites were killed. In southern California, hostility against Mexican-Americans grew, especially against young people wearing clothes tight at the chest and broad in the shoulders called "zoot suits." In a riot in 1943 three thousand white people in Los Angeles beat and ripped the "zoot suits" from about a hundred of these young men. (There were 300,000 Mexican-Americans in the armed forces. War hysteria in the United States was not directed against Germans (as in World War 1) or against Italians, but against Japanese-Americans. A few months after Pearl Harbor, all 110,000 people of Japanese birth or descent on Los Angeles, September, 1942 the West Coast (two thirds of them American-born and citizens of the United States) were removed from their homes to relocation centers. They lost their possessions, a considerable amount of property, and in most instances were forced to live in distant and uncomfortable surroundings. Not a single act of espionage or sabotage was proved against any of these Japanese-Americans either on the Pacific Coast or in Hawaii, where they were allowed to live undisturbed during the war; while they were undergoing this treatment, many of their sons and brothers were serving with conspicuous bravery in the armed forces. In 1944 the Supreme Court upheld the evacuation of the Japanese- Americans as a valid wartime measure, but near the end of the year the War Relocation center, Minidoka. Idaho What kinds of social changes are stimulated by wartime conditions? Compare how conditions during World War I and World War II affected the status of women and various minority groups, how they affected people's jobs and home life, and how they affected social customs. Although nearly ten million men were drafted, and more than five million additional men and women volunteered, the numbers and percentage of the population mobilized were far less than in Germany and Russia. A million of the men and women in the armed forces were black, roughly the same ratio as in the general population. Although one of the aims of the proposed March on Washington had been integration, most Negroes in the service were segregated. For the first time the Marine Corps was opened to them. The Navy offered more opportunities than were offered before the war. Numbers of Negroes became Air Force pilots and Army officers. Yet there was still serious discrimination against Negroes. The irony of stories of black soldiers guarding German prisoners and having to stand outside in the cold while the prisoners sat in a warm restaurant eating, was lost on few Americans. The War Department in 1944 issued an order forbidding segregation in transportation and recreational activities at all army stations. Women entering the armed forces also encountered discrimination because they could not be treated exactly like men. At first the Women's Army Corps, which came to include over a hundred thousand women, had difficulties. Their official historian wrote. "Admittedly, the Army had its share of a conservative element that had scarcely recovered from the shock of the mechanized horse when confronted with the militarized woman." Presiding over the great mobilization war was a combination of civilian and military leaders. The division between the two groups, the military and the civilian, was outlined as early as July, 1940. The civilian leaders coordinated war production, manpower, and foreign policy with the war policies that the military proposed. The civilians were to decide the "what" of national policies; "The' professional military men, the "how." Over both groups was the commander in chief. President Franklin D. Roosevelt. President Roosevelt maintained this policy throughout the war, The Truman Administration: Prosperity in a Perilous Era 713 Prosperity in a Perilous Era War has often been a means of considerable change. World War II brought America to leadership in a world increasingly split by ideology yet interrelated by common economic needs anti technological advances^-Change became so constant that its effects became harder to put into neat categories. Victory brought an end to the four long years of loss and heartache, but the demands of a new age meant that there was little relief from tension. The postwar world was a difficult one. The combined forces of economic growth and Allied ideology caused colonial peoples throughout the world to seek equality with their former rulers. Their competition for the potential support of the great powers expanded the growing separation between the wartime allies. In addition, the Soviet Union was not satisfied with the spheres influence outlined at Yalta and soon embarked on expansionist policies. To meet these dangers. President Truman proposed a new foreign policy based on collective security, and an extension and modification of the New Deal which he called the Fair Deal. With the Fair Deal he hoped to cope with the problems of a booming economy and the needs of the American people, including minorities suffering from discrimination. President Johnson interpreted the election as a "mandate for unity," and was backed by heavy majorities in both houses of Congress. In the next few months he obtained the enactment of a sweeping program. The President declared in his State of the Union message to Congress in January, 1965: Our basic task is threefold: — to keep our economy growing — to open for all Americans the opportunities now enjoyed by most Americans; — to improve the quality of life for all. . . . He outlined a comprehensive program and sent a number of special messages to Congress proposing legislation. These laws were enacted in 1965. Through the Medicare amendment to the Social Security Act, people over sixty-five for the first time received adequate medical assistance. At the end of the Eisenhower administration, in 1960, Congress had passed the Kerr- Mills Act, but the elderly had to prove they were without means in order to receive its benefits. The Medicare program, like any new legislation, had defects which would require modifications. But from the outset it provided 19,000,000 people over sixty-five with medical and hospital services which large numbers of them either could not have afforded before or which would have used up the savings they were trying to live on. Substantial Federal aid to education began for the first time. Congress provided funds for grants for textbooks and library books and gave other aid to both public and private schools in proportion to the number of disadvantaged pupils enrolled. The funds rose from less than $5,000,000,000 in 1964 for education and training to more than $12,000,000,000 three years later. In response to the complaints of minority groups within the United States, the discriminatory quota system written into the immigration legislation of the 1920's was finally abolished. Under the old legislation 83,000 persons a year could enter from England and Ireland, and only 308 from Greece. Gradually the quotas were eliminated and visas granted, with preference given to skilled and gifted people. Several laws helped improve the quality of American life. In addition to establishing the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, Congress passed laws to limit billboards and beautify land adjacent to highways. In response to the rapidly increasing problems of the cities and areas around them, a Department of Housing and Urban Development and a Department of Transportation were established in 1966. These departments administered measures aimed at improving the quality of urban life as well as raising the incomes of the poor. Congress also made a beginning at controlling water resources and eliminating pollution. Altogether, Congress in 1965-1966 * Was Johnson's sweeping victory in 1964 a result of his great popularity or an indication that Goldwater had not been a realistic choice for nomination by the Republican party? What effect did this loss have on the ideologies and the structure of the Republican party? 