The Puritans who remained in England worked through church pulpits and Parliament to promote religious reform laws. The accession of Charles I in 1625 made their work more difficult. Charles's wife was Catholic, and during his reign elements of church worship such as kneeling, chanting, and other rituals were restored, which the Puritans abhorred as unnecessary interferences between man and Scripture. Religious conformity was enforced more vigorously. Many Puritans were harrassed, while the more vocal leaders were persecuted, imprisoned, and denied any influence in church affairs. The Puritans were confronted with a dilemma. To desert the Church of England and go the way of the Separatists would mean a total rejection of their fellow Englishmen. But to remain in England without hope of reforming the church and English society was unacceptable to some Puritan leaders who sincerely believed that the depression, disease, and drought that hit England in the 1620's were signs that God had already started to punish this corrupt society. The Puritans' solution was to leave England and to establish a pure society in the New World as an example for others to follow. Unlike the Separatists, they remained within the Anglican Church, but they hoped to have the freedom to build a new community that would reflect their ideals. Massachusetts Historical Society The first American painters were "limners," or artisans, who painted signs and occasional portraits. This portrait of Ann Pollard, one of the original settlers of Boston, was painted by one such anonymous artist in 1721, after her one hundredth birthday. What traits of character does this image of a Puritan woman suggest to you? Groups of Puritans left England for America in the late 1620's and early 1630's, intent upon establishing a "city set upon a hill" for all to see. One of the leaders of this exodus, John Winthrop, justified the Puritans' decision to establish a mission in the wilderness by stating that: All other churches of Europe are brought to desolation, and our sins, for which the Lord begins already to frown upon us and to cut us short, do threaten evil times to be coming upon us. Who knows, but that God hath provided this place to be a refuge for many whom he means to save out of the general calamity. Growth of an American Outlook. John Adams, a leading participant in the American Revolution, raised a key question when he wrote, "But what do we mean by the American Revolution? Do we mean the American War?" He then answered his own question by saying, "The Revolution was effected before the war commenced. The Revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people." If Adams was correct, then we should try to discover what forces helped shape the minds and hearts of the colonists and eventually led to the break with Great Britain. Impact of the Environment. When the first settlers arrived in Virginia and Massachusetts, they encountered a wilderness unlike any they had known in Europe. To survive they had to master the natural surroundings. Land was cleared, homes were built, and eventually settlements were established; but a wilderness frontier always remained just beyond the last settlement. Frontier life was lonely and isolated. Neighbors usually lived miles apart, and the settlers had to feed, shelter, and defend themselves and their families with little assistance. The daily challenges of frontier living bred self-reliance and independence in the colonists. They did band together, however, when threatened by Indian attack. Cooperation in times of stress became a frontier hallmark. America's most important resource was land. Land, so precious in Europe, was available in tremendous quantity in the New World. A settler could move about until he found an ideal site, establish his own farm, and become self-sustaining. With so much land and so many opportunities for movement and growth, the colonist had reason to be optimistic. As lands were cleared, roads constructed, and new settlements erected, the signs of progress were evident to all. Not only were landowners and farmers optimistic, but laborers were as well. Because the majority of colonists went into farming, paid laborers were in short supply, and a skilled worker could demand good wages for his services. Settlers arriving in America with nothing more than a willingness to work found this to be a "good poor man's country." Diversity in the Colonies. Among those who made the perilous voyage to America were the hopeful, the adventuresome, the persecuted, and the dissenting. In contrast to the Puritans, some came seeking only material gain, like the first settlers at Jamestown, Virginia, who soon prospered by raising tobacco. Maryland, founded by George Calvert, became a colonial refuge for Catholics. The establishment of the Dutch colony of New Amsterdam in the 1620's brought another nationality to this land. William Penn's founding of Pennsylvania in 1681 provided the persecuted Quakers with a sanctuary. People who could not conform to the established beliefs and practices of one colony could seek acceptance in another. Splinter groups growing out of the more traditional religions added to the religious diversity in the colonies. Gradually the right of the individual to follow his own beliefs and customs came to be more widely accepted. Although the great majority of colonists were of English descent, a growing number of French, German, Dutch, and Scotch-Irish colonists, and settlers of other nationalities, changed the character of the colonies. The non-English settlers in the colonies were often less loyal to the mother country than those of English descent. These minority groups were particularly concerned that the colonial governments protect their interests. Salutary Neglect. For the first 150 years the American colonies developed under a general British attitude of salutary neglect, or a beneficial lack of attention. This was due in part to the English view of the colonies as a wilderness populated by uncivilized frontiersmen and undesirables. The practice of shipping convicts, prostitutes, and beggars to the New World led some Englishmen to refer to the colonists as "a race of convicts." During most of the colonial period the British government was preoccupied with problems other than the development of a distant land. Since the colonies were 3000 miles away, direct control by the British government was virtually impossible, as it took months to communicate across the Atlantic. Settlers who came from Great Britain, however, brought their traditions of individual liberty, representative government, and supremacy of law. The influence of these customs is clearly seen in the Puritan enterprise and in other colonies when they formed assemblies in which elected delegates represented their fellow colonists in making laws. As Edmund Burke, a British statesman of the Revolutionary period, proclaimed, the colonists "are not only devoted to liberty, but to liberty according to English ideas, and on English principles." The British Empire. While many scholars accept John Adams' thesis that the American Revolution was essentially a development within the colonies, others argue that it should be viewed as a problem arising within the British Empire. According to these scholars, careful consideration must be given to the decisions made in England regarding the colonies and to the relationships between the colonies and the mother country. Economics of Empire. In the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries the leading nations of the world—England, France, Holland, Portugal, and Spain- engaged in a struggle to secure land where colonies could be established to provide raw materials and markets for manufactured goods. The economic theory behind this colonizing activity has been called mercantilism. According to this theory the colonies would benefit by being settled by an advanced nation, protected from hostile forces, and assured of a market for their products. By controlling the production and trade of its colonies, each imperial nation hoped to take the lead in world trade. The regulation of trade dominated the relationship between the mother country and its colonies. In the latter half of the seventeenth century Britain passed a series of Navigation Acts requiring that commerce to and from its colonies be restricted to English vessels (colonial ships were considered English vessels); that "enumerated articles" produced in the colonies, including sugar, tobacco, and indigo, be shipped only to England or its colonies; and that duties on certain colonial exports be assessed at the ports of departure to prevent colonial shippers from avoiding payment. Under this system the colonists obtained a trading monopoly on their raw materials in England, but they were forced to sell their goods at lower prices than they might have received elsewhere. The English merchants filled by blacks. The sensitivity of the whites toward their "superior" status was revealed by their insistence that they be called "hired help." while blacks were called "servants." The economic situation of the free Negro was seriously affected by heavy immigration between 1830 and I860. Irish immigrants, in particular, congregated in cities and competed with Negroes for jobs, with the result that fierce and often bloody conflict broke out between the two groups. In 1830 Negroes made up the majority of New York servants; by 1850 Irish "hired help" outnumbered Negro servants ten to one. The Irish also pushed Negroes out of occupations such as barbering and construction work. Professor Leon Litwack who has studied the situation of the Negro in the free states before the Civil War, describes the situation in the North in 1860: Despite some notable advances, the northern Negro remained largely disfranchised, segregated, and economically oppressed. Discrimination still barred him from most polls, juries, schools, and workshops, as well as from many libraries, theaters, lyceums, museums, public conveyances, and literary societies. . . . Having excluded the Negro from profitable employments, the whites scorned his idleness and poverty; having taxed him in some states for the support of public education, they excluded his children from the schools or placed them in separate and inferior institutions and then deplored the ignorance of his race. . . . Nevertheless, most Negroes remained in the United States and chose to die on American soil, knowing full well that social proscription would follow them to the grave. Successful Free Negroes. Few Negroes could avoid the problems of prejudice, but many were still able to make important contributions to the physical, economic, and cultural development of America. Phillis Wheatley, a slave girl raised and educated by a wealthy Boston family, poured out her thoughts in poetry that was read by Americans of all races. Her work was also appreciated by Europeans at a time when they gave little attention or recognition to American literary works. Paul Cuffe demonstrated the capacity of Negroes to succeed in business ventures. Starting with nothing but his willingness to work, Cuffe became a shipbuilder. By 1806 he owned and operated several ships and had acquired considerable property. After becoming a Quaker, Cuffe began to take an active interest in the welfare of Negroes. He organized a colonization scheme for taking Negroes back to Africa and transported thirty-eight Negroes there at his own expense. But he soon found, as did later supporters of colonization, that the costs of such a venture on a large scale were too great for private citizens to bear. Perhaps the most famous Negro of this period was Benjamin Banneker, who could list proficiency in mathematics, astronomy, mechanical engineering, and surveying among his many accomplishments. A prolific writer of almanacs, Banneker won the admiration of many prominent men. By 1860 the destiny of Negroes in American society was no longer a matter of indifference; it was a moral, social, economic, and political issue that bitterly divided the nation. The colonists who purchased the first slaves could not have foreseen the tragic consequences that would ensue. Slavery originated in America without a fixed plan. Within fifty years of its introduction. however, legal codes were developed that institutionalized the practice of holding humans as chattels. Yet as late as the Revolutionary War period slavery had still not become inextricably linked with the social, political, economic, and cultural life of a particular section of the nation. The invention of the cotton gin, the spread of the cotton culture to the fertile fields of the southwest, the reluctance of southern slaveowners to surrender voluntarily the use of slave labor—all combined to defeat efforts to abolish slavery. Slaves in the United States were condemned to a life that offered few, if any, rewards and expectations. Some slaves submitted, while others chose escape, rebellion, and sabotage as means of maintaining their human dignity. Many slaves acquired training in skilled occupations, but despite their growth in expertise and knowledge, they were still unable to assure their families a better life or to share in the American dream of economic abundance. Nearly 450,000 Negroes acquired quasi- freedom in the years prior to the Civil War. In the South these free Negroes could own property and raise their families, but they were denied civil and political freedoms that were natural to the white man. In the North the freed Negro fared little better because of white prejudice and increasing economic competition from newly arrived immigrants. Jim Crow and the Federal Government. A few months after becoming President in 1901, Theodore Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington, with whom he had long been in contact, to the White House for lunch. The visit was denounced throughout the South. "White men of the South, how do you like it?" asked the New Orleans Times-Democrat. "When Mr, Roosevelt sits down to dinner with a Negro, he declares that the Negro is the social equal of the white man." Roosevelt insisted that he would have Dr. Washington to dine as often as he liked, but the invitation was never repeated. Shortly after the incident Roosevelt confided in a letter to a friend, "1 have not been able to think out any solution of the terrible problem offered by the presence of the Negro on this continent." He believed that "the only wise and honorable and Christian thing to do is to treat each black man and each white man strictly on his merits as a man." In addition, he faced a political dilemma in the South, where he was anxious to develop a strong Republican party. In order to retain the loyalty of northern Negroes who at that time voted Republican, he needed to take measures to aid southern Negroes. But such measures would endanger his support from southern whites. In a letter to Booker T. Washington in 1904 Roosevelt stated his aims regarding the Negro in the South. The safety for the colored man in Louisiana is to have a white man's party which shall be responsible and honest, in which the colored man shall have representation but in which he shall not be the dominant force —a party in which, as is now' the ease in the Federal service under me, he shall hold a percentage of the offices but in which a majority of the offices shall be given to white men of high character who will protect the Negro before the law.* •From The South Since 1865 by John S. Ezell: copyright 1963, The Macmillan Company: p. 71. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. Roosevelt's successor, William Howard Taft, inspired little confidence among Negroes that he would assist them. The same was true of Virginia-born Woodrow Wilson, who assumed the Presidency in 1913. Shortly after taking office, Wilson received a letter from author Thomas Dixon complaining that he was "heartsick over the announcement that you have appointed a Negro to boss white girls as Registrar of the Treasury." Wilson replied that "We are handling the force of the colored people who are now in the departments in just the way they ought to be handled. We are trying —and by degrees succeeding —a plan of concentration which will put them all together and will not in any one bureau mix the two races." As President, he did nothing to prevent cabinet heads from instituting a plan of segregation modeled on the southern pattern. Thus Jim Crow became national policy. Review and Discussion 1. What was the purpose of Jim Crow laws? 2. How did the Supreme Court assist the forces of segregation? 3. How did Washington and DuBois differ in their attitude toward segregation? In Pursuit of Equality In the North and West attitudes toward blacks changed very little after the Civil War. Negroes still lived in urban ghettos and worked in a segregated world. Their economic position worsened in the last decades of the nineteenth century as newly arrived European immigrants displaced blacks working as waiters, mechanics, barbers, and even bootblacks. At the same time, the growth of the labor movement hurt Negroes; most unions accepted only white men. The militant response of some Negroes to these conditions during the first decades of the twentieth century initiated a struggle that continues today. Review and Discussion 1. What role did the colonial cities play in the American Revolution? 2. What part did cities play in the frontier movement? 3 What is meant by the double frontier? The Growth of Urban America During and after the Civil War cities grew dramatically as the pace of industrialism increased. More and more citizens and immi- Irani grants looked to the nation's cities for their livelihood. In 1840 only one out of every twelve Americans lived in a city of 8000 or more; in 1860 the proportion was one out of six; and by 1890 one out of three. In a sense, the American city became a safety valve for people seeking new opportunities; many of those who were restless and discontented began looking to the city, not to the frontier, for an escape. Commerce and Industry. The Civil War highlighted the importance of cities and contributed to their growth. The Union's supe- millions of people rior resources of people and industries were centered in northern cities. Because the war promoted the growth of industries to supply soldiers with food, clothing, and equipment, cities that housed these industries prospered. Chicago, for example, became an important supplier of foodstuffs, clothing, saddles, harnesses, and leather boots to army contractors. Hogs from the farms of the Midwest were shipped to Chicago to be slaughtered and sent out to the Union armies. Iron and steel, so important in the arming and transporting of the Union Army, were produced in Chicago's mills in increasing abundance. Chicago's industrial and commercial growth during the Civil War was representative of many cities. As American manufacturing increased during and after the war, the nation became less dependent on imported goods, and city growth came to depend more upon industrial expansion than upon foreign trade. Chicago emerged from the Civil War as the nation's meat-packing center, although Milwaukee and Kansas City were soon to share in this industry. Pittsburgh. Cleveland, St. Louis, and Chicago became the sites of great steel works. The milling industry became the essential business of Minneapolis, and to a lesser degree of St. Louis and Chicago. The establishment of oil refineries under the leadership of John D. Rockefeller and his Standard Oil Company resulted in Cleveland's rapid growth. New York continued as the financial capital of the nation and maintained its position as the nation's busiest port. Smaller cities often based their economies on the manufacture of special products, such as chocolate in Hershey, Pennsylvania, and brass in Waterbury, Connecticut. Other cities capitalized on regional assets. Milwaukee became the center for the production of beer partly because the area was well suited for growing hops. Papermaking industries sprouted in Massachusetts near the town of Holyoke to take advantage of certain chemical properties in the Connecticut River that contributed to producing fine paper. In other cases, inventions accounted for the rise and prosperity of cities. The invention of the sewing machine by Elias Howe and the establishment of the Howe Machine Company in Bridgeport, Connecticut, gave that city an important industry. Thomas Edison's experiments with electricity in upstate New York led to the birth of the General Electric Company in Schenectady. Improvements in glass production and the invention of the cash register brought new industries to Corning, New York, and Dayton. Ohio, respectively. The Lure of the City. The Industrial Revolution not only created towns and cities but also created new jobs and economic opportunities that lured rural Americans to the cities. In the last half of the nineteenth century increasing numbers of Americans left their farms for city life. In addition, many newly freed Negroes left their former masters after the Civil War to go to northern or southern cities. Washington, D.C., in particular, saw a great influx of Negroes. But in cities as elsewhere, the black man encountered hostility and closed doors in his bid for acceptance and opportunity. Nevertheless, cities continued to attract hopeful blacks at an increased rate in the twentieth century. Many rural dwellers left their farms because small-scale farming was becoming less profitable. The small farmer, as the supplier of the nation's food, had long held an important position in the country. But technological improvements that made farming more efficient also led to overproduction and lower prices for farm produce. The use of refrigeration cars on trains and the development of improved canning processes meant that food produced on large mechanized farms could be shipped safely anywhere in Hie influx of immigrants as well " people from farm areas during the second half of the nineteenth century led to severe overcrowding in the nation's cities. Slum pmdilions such as those depicted in this George dellows' painting entitled "Cliff Dwellers" were the result. Slums were often ghettos, too, with each ethnic group living in a well-defined A'lftdps County Museum of Art the country. This, in combination with the increasing cost of railroad transportation, tended to make small-scale farming unprofitable and to relegate the independent farmer to the position of a second-class citizen, as one historian phrased it. In contrast to the unprofitable small farm, the city appeared to offer new and richer opportunities. Hamlin Garland, author of numerous stories about life in rural, nineteenth- century America, describes his feelings upon returning to farm life following a family move to town for one year: It was "back to the field," or ''out into the cold, cold world," so forth we went upon the soil in the old familiar way, there to plod to and fro endlessly behind the seeder and the harrow. It was harder than ever to follow a team for ten hours over the soft ground, and early rising was more difficult than it had ever been before, but I discovered some compensations which helped me bear these discomforts. . . . The west wind, laden with the delicious smell of uncovered earth, the tender blue of the sky, the cheerful chirping of the ground sparrows, the jocund whistling of the gophers, the winding flight of the prairie pigeons — all these sights and sounds of spring swept back upon me, bringing something sweeter and more significant than before. I had gained in perception and also in the power to assimilate what 1 perceived. This year in town had other far-reaching effects. It tended to warp us from our father's designs. It placed the rigorous, filthy drudgery of the farm-yard in sharp contrast with the carefree companionable existence led by my friends in the village, and we longed to be of their condition. We had gained our first set of comparative ideas, and with them an unrest which was to carry us very far away. From A Son of the Middle Border by Hamlin Garland: copyright 1917, P. F. Collier & Son; pp. 204-205. Reprinted by permission of The Macmillan Company. Immigrants and the Cities. In the nineteenth century overseas migration of peoples became interconnected with the movement of people from farm to city. It has been estimated that for every European who migrated to the United States in the 1870's and I880's, four Europeans moved from farm to city in Europe. Most of those coming to America flowed into the cities along with the sons and daughters of American farmers. The migration of rural people to the industrial city has scarcely abated. The most dramatic migration in recent times is that of the rural southern Negro, the Mexican, and the Puerto Rican into northern and western cities. This movement has brought the Negro, in particular, into bitter conflict on occasions with earlier minorities —Irish, Italian, Slav —who feel their hard-won status threatened by the newcomers. The "Yew" Immigrants. The minimal friction between immigrant groups before the American Revolution resulted as much from the slow, steady nature of immigration as from the dominant English quality of the immigrants. But as the nineteenth century progressed, the immigrant stream became a torrent. In the hundred years from 1815 to 1915, thirty million immigrants came to the United States. During the first half of this period the majority of immigrants came from the British Isles, Germany, Scandinavia, Switzerland, and Holland. Starting in the 1880's, however, the focus of immigration shifted dramatically. The fifteen million "new" immigrants who arrived from 1890 to 1914 came chiefly from Austria- Hungary, Italy. Poland, Russia, Greece. Romania, and Turkey. Very often the migrant's destination was an American city. Newly arrived immigrants constituted nearly fifty percent of the population of some cities. Immigrants tended to cluster in groups in their own part of the city, often called a ghetto, so that they could be among people of their own kind and practice their Old World customs. These ghettos gave new immigrants a feeling of belonging and a sense of security, but their very existence gave justification to those who argued that these foreigners were un-American and a threat to the "American way." The terrifying loneliness and insecurity of life in a strange continent was softened by the assistance offered to new arrivals by relatives and friends already established in cities. Michael Gold describes how it was for his parents in New York's East Side in his book Jews Without Money: When I woke of a morning, 1 was never greatly surprised to find in my bed a new family of immigrants, in their foreign baggy underwear. They looked pale and exhausted. They smelled of Ellis Island disinfectant, a stink that sickened me like castor oil. . . . After a few days they left us with thanks. But some stayed on and on. eating at our table. Don't think my mother liked this. We were too poor to be generous. She'd grumble about some one. . . but she'd never really ask him to move out. She didn't know how. Americanization. The process of Americanization often carried with it a heavy psychological cost for immigrants, especially in families in which the children departed from the ways of their parents. Not understanding the manners and customs of their new land but anxious for their children to adopt these customs and become accepted, immigrant parents often allowed the gap between themselves and their offspring to widen. Mary Antin wrote about this "disintegration of home life" in her autobiography: My parents knewr only that they desired us to be like American children: and seeing how their neighbors gave their children boundless liberty, they turned us also loose, never doubting but that the American way was the best way. In public deportment, in etiquette, For the poor immigrant the way to success was through education. Young pupils, like this Italian boy, had to contend not only with the difficulty of learning a new language, but also with surroundings that often were not conducive to learning. Photograph by Jacob A. Riis, The Jacob A. Riis Collection, Museum of the City ot New York in all matters of social intercourse, they had no standards to go by, seeing that America was not Polotzk. In their bewilderment and uncertainty they needs must trust us children to learn from such models as the tenements afforded. More than this, they must step down from their throne of parental authority, and take the law from their children's mouths; for they had no other means of finding out what was good American form. The result was that laxity of domestic organization, that inversion of normal relations which makes for friction, and which sometimes ends in breaking up a family that was formerly united and happy. This sad process of disintegration of home life may be observed in almost any immigrant family of our class and with our traditions and aspirations. It is part of the process of Americanization; an upheaval preceding the state of repose. It is the cross that the first and second generations must bear, an involuntary sacrifice for the sake of future generations. 'From The Promised Lund by Mary Antin; copyright 1912, Houghton Mifflin Co.; 271. Reprinted by permission of the publisher. Public schools became the chief Americanizing force for immigrant children. Within a few brief years, immigrant school children learned a new language and were given a set of values and ideals shared by the children of earlier immigrants. More important than the curriculum was the variety of human associations shared by school children of many nationalities and religions. So successful was this educational acculturation that the thoroughly Americanized second generation children often felt painfully separated from their parents' cultural values. Political participation provided an important means for minorities to achieve power and acceptance. The opportunities for political participation derived from the fact that immigrants flocked to large cities where the voting power of ethnic voting blocs became the key element in providing political bosses with power. Established politicians found it necessary to appeal to the immigrant vote to get elected. Leaders soon rose from the immigrant ranks and organized ethnic communities into political power bases. Politicians, in turn, provided needed civic services for their fellow immigrants. Of all the means used by many of the immigrant minorities to achieve equality and status, none was more significant than economic advancement. Throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries a frontier-indus- trial expansion of the United States provided a wealth of jobs. The Irish dug the canals and drove the railroad spikes for eastern railroads; Chinese and Japanese built the railroad lines in the West; Poles and Slavs worked the mines and manned the nation's steel mills: Jewish immigrants worked in the nation's garment factories. Each ethnic immigrant group was able to establish an economic base mainly through the vast number of unskilled jobs available. As Jews, Italians, Slavs, and Greeks poured into industrial cities, the children of earlier immigrants moved into middle-class business and professional positions, a pattern that has been repeated for later immigrant groups in the twentieth century. Review and Discussion 1. Why did urbanization accelerate after the Civil War? 2. What attracted rural dwellers to city living? 3. What role did cities play in the Americanization of immigrants? Life in the City The city encompassed a wide variety of occupations, activities, and people. There were opportunities for numerous social relationships, educational and religious pursuits, cultural activities, and amusement. In contrast to the typical country town, individuals could look, think, and act differently. As a result. the city more than the small town attracted the outcasts of conventional society, but it also was home to many of the nation's outstanding artists, writers, and independent thinkers. City life fostered both individual freedom and strong group ties. For many, a block or a neighborhood offered the same opportunities for close friendships and personal loyalties as a small town. Tenement neighbors provided aid and comfort in times of sickness and need. A widow with several children who once left the city for a comfortable home in the country returned to the city at the end of six weeks because, as she put it, "Folks is more company than stumps." To this woman and countless others, the companionship found in the city was more important than the discomforts. City Problems. The physical closeness of city dwellers did not always eliminate their feelings of isolation and insecurity. In the country an individual could generally count on having food and a place to live regardless of the prosperity of the times. But in the city everything depended on keeping one's job. Without income, food, clothing, and shelter were jeopardized. In the competitive struggle for jobs, many lost out and were doomed to poverty. Poor Working Conditions. Working conditions in cities during the latter decades of the nineteenth century contributed to the insecurity and anxiety of workers. This was the era of the industrial captains, who ruthlessly eliminated their competition as they strove to build gigantic monopolies. Decisions on prices, wages, labor practices, and hours were made by the management of corporations whose power was almost unrestricted. Labor unions had little power, and those in control of the government felt that government should not interfere in the functioning of the free enterprise system. dangered entire sections of the city. Most cities have suffered at least one disastrous fire in their history. The use of concrete and steel in constructing city buildings and the increased efficiency of city fire departments have reduced the fire danger. City Government. "There is no denying," British scholar James Bryce wrote in 1888, "that the government of cities is the one conspicuous failure of the United States." Unfortunately, the evidence from those years of rapid urbanization lends support to Bryce's statement. Urban expansion necessitated many programs of construction and improvement. Public buildings were erected, roads paved, sewage pipes installed, and public utilities built —all with tax money. City officials were thus required to make many decisions concerning the awarding of contracts, franchises, and subsidies involving the expenditure of public funds. Opportunities for corruption presented themselves in every decision, especially since city governments grew so fast that political authority was decentralized among numerous independent city departments and it was unclear what the exact responsibilities of each city official were. As cities grew and their populations became increasingly mixed, the close contact between the citizen and his local government that was most apparent in the New England town meeting was lost, making corruption easier. Delivering the Vote. Capitalizing on this confused situation was the political organization, or machine, headed by a city "boss" who sought control over the vast network of people, decisions, and funds involved in city government. A city boss and his political machine were able to gain control over a city's government by "delivering" the votes necessary for the election of candidates backed by the machine. Once in office, machine politicians either carried out the wishes of the machine or the machine backed other candidates for their offices in the next election. Delivering the vote was accomplished in several ways. Machine politicians allied themselves with ethnic groups by befriending as many people as possible and by providing them benefits to ensure their loyalty.] This was helpful to many immigrants who were given jobs and favors and were assisted! in their adjustment to a new life. A number of the services that are today provided ht formal governmental programs were then dispensed by the machine in exchange for votes. George Washington Plunkitt, a district leader in New York City's Tammany Hall machine, explained his system for keeping the loyalty of voters: What tells in holdin' your grip on your district is to go right down among the poor families and help them in the different ways they need help. I've got a regular system for this. If there's a fire in Ninth, Tenth, or Elev- I enth Avenue, for example, . . . I'm usually j there ... as soon as the fire engines. If a family is burned out ... I just get quarters for them, buy clothes for them if their clothes were burned up. and fix them up till they get things runnin' again. A second reform, which was first tried in Staunton, Virginia, and then popularized in Dayton, Ohio, was the city manager plan. Under this form of government, the elected city council appointed a specially-trained executive to administer city functions. These innovations helped to weaken the power of the machine by making city administration more responsive to the public's interest. Social Reform. Not all reform taking place in the cities during the period, however, was politically oriented. Jane Addams sought solutions to numerous social problems. In 1889 she founded Hull House in Chicago as a social center for immigrants who, she wrote, could so "easily isolate themselves in the American cities." Hull House and similar settlement houses in other cities gave immigrants a meeting place for social and educational activities, and in some instances food and rooms. While Jane Addams and others who ran settlement houses encouraged newcomers to retain the values they had held in their past life, they also brought "lane Addams' Memorial Collection, University of Illinois at Chicago Circle'' Jane Addams, shown here in front of Hull House, fought for many causes. She was a pioneer in the successful campaign to reform the treatment of juveniles by the courts. For her efforts in social reform, she was a co-winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931 them into contact with other types of Americans and helped them all to become part of a smaller community within the large city. Jane Addams was also interested in the well-being of urban youth. She was especially concerned about the lack of wholesome recreational activities available to youth in the cities and the manner in which many youths were exploited for profit. She wrote: This industrialism has gathered together multitudes of eager young creatures from all quarters of the earth as a labor supply for the countless factories and workshops, upon which the present industrial city is based. Never before in civilization have such numbers of young girls been suddenly released from the protection of the home and permitted to walk Review and Discussion 1. Why did slums develop in American cities? 2. How did political machines manage to control city politics and perpetuate their rule? 3. Why was city planning given relatively little attention throughout most of the nineteenth century? In Summary As the nineteenth century ended, it was evident that the frontier was ceasing to dominate the character of the nation, if indeed it ever did. The continuing effects of the frontier heritage were to be found more in the mind and spirit of Americans than in any tangible forms. Throughout the nineteenth century the nation had steadily grown more industrialized and urbanized, and this largely accounts for the power and influence that the United States has come to acquire in the twentieth century. In settling the frontier, the American pioneer met and conquered innumerable obstacles. Those who migrated west to tame the frontier in the face of Indian hostility, sicknesses, and environmental hazards were among the most determined and resourceful of all people. But challenges of an equal, if not greater, magnitude have confronted Americans in the growth of their cities. The problems of congestion, pollution, ghetto living, corrupt politics, crime, and ugliness have tested, and continue to test, the ingenuity and perseverance of individual Americans and the national will. Today Americans face urban problems that have multiplied and grown even more pressing, though the nature of these problems has not changed much. Negroes, Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, and other minorities have replaced earlier immigrant groups in the ghettos. Factories and automobiles have filled the air with deadly gases. Rapid urbanization of America Expose of Tweed Ring Invention of telephone First American city to reach 1,000.000 population (New York) Beginning of "new" immigration Publication of Riis' How the Other Halt Livei Introduction of Subway System iBosionl Birth of city-manager plan a tougher rail. When a flood of British iron began to hurt American manufacturing in the 1850's, Cooper and Hewitt turned to making cable wires for the hundreds of new bridges being built as the population moved west. When the offices of the nation's largest publisher. Although their Trenton mills prospered through the 1850's and continued to grow during the Civil War, Cooper and Hewitt faced serious competition from a number of large iron mills that were rolling iron and forging rails in Pennsylvania. The Pennsylvania companies combined or integrated several stages of production, a trend that was to accelerate as the United States moved into the final stage of economic development. Review and Discussion 1. How did technological advances of the mid- nineteenth century change the character of farming in the United States? 2. How did the improvement of mass-production techniques aid manufacturing development? 3. Why were improvements in iron production so important to economic expansion? Self-Sustaining Growth After the Civil War, far-reaching economic changes took place that affected the lives of most Americans. By the 1870's and 1880's a vast internal market was united by telegraph lines, roads, rails, and waterways. The American population, which was doubling every twenty years, provided industries with an abundant labor supply and with consumers for their products. A level of economic growth was reached that provided more than sufficient capital from within the country making new enterprisers much less dependent on foreign investors for capital than before the Civil War. At the same time, new lands were opened up for settlement, and new resources, such as the Mesabi iron range in Minnesota, were discovered. Millions of immigrants poured in from Europe to provide the muscle to help pound rails, dig coal, mine ore, tend blast furnaces, operate machines in factories, and settle the harsh plains frontier. All of these factors combined to produce w'hat historian Carl Degler calls "The Age of Economic Resolution," a period when "the United States became the greatest economic power in the world, toppling Britain from its long-held The completion of the constuction of the first transcontinental rail line was marked by a ceremony at Promontory, Utah, on May 10, 1869, at which a golden spike was u" to join together the track laid by the Union Pacific wf the track laid by the Central Pacific. The network of n roads crisscrossing the United States provided a vital element for the nation's growth by linking together all regio* and making possible a free flow of goods in every directTM Library oi ConM The Worker's Response to Industrialism Histories of the laboring man in the United Hates usually treat only organized labor. It I too often forgotten that the vast majority nfnineteenth-century workers were unorganized. Most of these workers, who came from kmerican farms or peasant villages in Europe, Responded to industrialism by adjustment and accommodation rather than by challenge and Conflict. I After the Civil War several developments influenced the position of workers. First, as neap land for farming became increasingly Scarce, millions of immigrants settled in large cities. These immigrants formed a ready sup- By of unskilled labor and were willing to work Sr low wages under poor working conditions. Second, the relation between employer and mployee was changing. Before the Civil War distinctions between employer and worker were blurred. This was less true in the late 1800's, as Theodore Roosevelt observed: The old familiar relations between employer and employee were passing. A few generations before, the boss had known every man in his shop. ... In the small establishment there had been a friendly human relationship between employer and employee. . . . There was no such relation between the great railway magnates, who controlled the anthracite industry, and the one hundred and fifty thousand men who worked in their mines, or the half million women and children who were dependent upon these miners for their daily bread. In addition, work became increasingly mechanized, with the worker tending to function like a machine. The distress experienced by Carrie, the heroine of Theodore Dreiser's novel Sister Carrie, who left the countryside to work in a Chicago shoe factory, illustrates the relentless quality of factory work: iarly labor unions, such as the lew York Mechanic Society, low membership certificate is pwn here, were made up of artisans They existed jly for social and fraternal unlike those unions lized during the period ot industrialization following Civil War, whose primary pur- was to improve members' litions of employment. Why you think that the unions of the It periods were so different? Courtesy, The Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum ters to preach a religion "that laid hold of life with both hands" rather than one that sought to wash its hands of the grimy conditions of industrial America. Whatever their field of interest, prag- matic-minded men and women shared the conviction that supposedly fixed principles were in reality only justifications for human conduct. They saw that human society was constantly changing, that it demanded new principles for solving new problems. They had faith in man's capacity to deal with his problems, and they expressed this faith by forming a number of civic improvement and reform organizations such as the National Child Labor Committee, the National Consumer's League, and the General Federation of Women's Clubs. City and State Reform. In 1900 most immigrants in American cities lived in poverty. Though reformers like Jane Addams and Lillian Wald attempted to lessen the pain of adjustment through their settlement houses, the problems of the city seemed to outstrip the rush of immigrants. The reforming energies of the progressives first turned to the deplorable conditions of much of urban America. New forms of municipal government and municipal ownership of utilities converted many cities into models of honest government. City progressives, however, very often found their reforms defeated by corrupt state governments. In many instances, state governments were controlled by the dominant industry of the state, such as the railroads in California and the lumber industry in Wisconsin. In Wisconsin the fight for reform was led by "Fighting Bob" La Follette, who was elected governor in 1900. He immediately sought to improve Wisconsin's government by pushing through the legislature laws for more effective taxation of the railroads and lumber corporations. To break the power of political bosses, he promoted the direct primary by which the people, not the politicians, would select candidates for office. In addition, he sponsored laws to conserve resources, to set up commissions to regulate railway and other utility charges, and to provide for a state income tax and for state insurance on savings bank deposits. He also supported workingmen's compensation laws, prohibition of child labor, and limitation of working hours for women. One of La Follette's most successful actions was the marshaling of talent and brainpower from the University of Wisconsin to solve the state's problems. According to historians Allan Nevins and Henry Steele Com- mager, "Here was an experiment in practical progressivism which excited the interest of the whole nation. . . . He [La Follette] revealed the possibilities of a state as a laboratory for political experiments and pointed the way not only for other states but for the nation." The "Wisconsin idea," as La Follette's program was called, spread quickly through the nation. In California newly-elected governor Hiram Johnson ended the domination of the Southern Pacific Railroad. In Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, Oregon, New Jersey, and New York, reform governors took over and instituted programs modeled on the La Follette pattern. Oregon led the nation in reforms aimed at giving its citizens more voice in their government by adopting the secret ballot, instituting the initiative, referendum, and recall, holding direct primaries to select candidates, and passing laws against corrupt practices. While reforms were being instituted in many states, progressivism soon reached the national level. Two strong-willed Presidents — Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson — led the progressive reform drive. Roosevelt's "Square Deal." When William McKinley's assassination vaulted the restless form an imperialistic image of the United States in the eyes of many Orientals, despite the fact that American policy has consistently been to defend colonial peoples' right of self- determination in the twentieth century. There is no simple explanation of American policy in Asia. Anticolonial ideals have been inter- meshed with commercial, religious, and political interests. American Involvement in China Enterprising New England seafarers, cut off from the markets of the British Empire following the Revolutionary War, initiated the first American contacts with the Far East. As early as the 1780's, American ships were bound for China, though the China trade did not become firmly established until the advent of the clipper ship, following the War of 1812. Trade was limited, however, by the refusal of the Chinese government to deal with foreigners as equals. China was steeped in the traditions of an ancient culture in which foreigners were considered barbarians. Because of this philosophy, contacts with foreigners were severely limited. Only the port city of Canton was open to western trade, and merchants obtained trading privileges mainly by paying tribute to the Chinese Imperial Government. Foreigners themselves had no rights and were subject to Chinese justice. By the early 1800's, however, China was no longer the prosperous, powerful nation it had been in the Middle Ages. Its commercial attraction as a supplier of such luxury items as tea, silk, spices, and porcelain remained, but China could not match the military strength nor the industrial technology of the western world. The China Trade. By the early nineteenth century, businessmen in Great Britain, France, Portugal, the Netherlands, and the United States began to see China and its teeming millions as a limitless market for manufactured goods rather than as a supplier of luxury products. Inspired by visions of great profits, they increased pressure on the Chinese government to reduce trade restrictions. The growing conflict between Chinese attempts to limit trade and western efforts to open it came to a head in the Opium War of 1839-1842. Fighting between Great Britain and China broke out when Chinese officials seized and destroyed a British-owned supply of opium valued at $8,000,000 in an attempt to halt the illicit traffic of the harmful drug within China. With their superior military technology, the British won a decisive victory over the Chinese. As a result of the war, the British were able to force the Chinese to open four ports in addition to Canton to British trade. Within a short time they also were able to compel the weakening Chinese Imperial Government, which had lost much popular support through corruption and inefficiency, to accept the principle of extraterritorial rights, whereby British citizens accused of committing a crime in China would be tried by British courts rather than by local Chinese tribunals. During this period the United States obtained similar rights in China. The usual pattern was for Americans to demand from the Chinese the same concessions that had been granted the British. For example, in 1844 the first American commissioner to China, Caleb Cushing, negotiated the Treaty of Wanghia (the first treaty of importance between the United States and an Asian nation) which granted the United States trading rights in the same five ports open to British trade. The treaty also gave Americans such special privileges as the right of residence in those "treaty port" cities and extended extraterritorial rights to all legal matters. This nation's ties with China were strengthened by the Burlingame Treaty of 1868 which, among other provisions, granted Chinese and American nationals the right to take up residence and travel freely in each other's country. The goodwill generated by the treaty was largely destroyed, however, when heavy Chinese immigration to the West Coast brought pressure by labor and nativist groups on the Federal Government to end unlimited immigration. A new agreement was negotiated in 1880 that gave the United States the right to regulate, limit, or suspend Chinese immigration. Missionaries in China. American missionaries who traveled to China represented a variety of denominations. This apparent disunity in the Christian faith made a poor impression on the Chinese, and the number of converts was negligible (only about one percent of the Chinese population converted to Christianity). Still, the missionaries established schools and exposed many Chinese to western ways and ideas. They believed they were establishing firm bonds of friendship with the Chinese as well as giving them aid and guidance in modernization. But the missionaries also created antagonism among many Chinese who resented being treated as heathens in need of civilizing. The educated Chinese regarded the first missionaries as ignorant people unaware of China's great cultural heritage; they feared that the Christians would try to take over China and subvert its culture. To them, the missionaries were a disruptive force who taught doctrines that contradicted the cultural and moral values on w hich the stability of Chinese society rested. The Christian influence became significant when a young missionary convert, Hung Hsiu-ch'iian, began to think that images he saw during epileptic seizures were mystic visions. He believed he was the second son of God ordained to establish a new order (the Taipings) that would bring a new period of The Granger Collection Although the opening of trade relations between China and western countries permitted American and European missionaries to expose the Chinese to the teachings of Christ, western education, and the innovations of modern science, the missionaries had relatively little success in converting the Chinese from Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, and ancestor worship. peace and well-being to China. By promoting a comprehensive program of reforms, including such ideas as ending discrimination against minorities, providing land for the poor, and legalizing female equality. Hung gathered sufficient support to lead a rebellion against the Manchu dynasty (the Chinese Imperial Government) that lasted from 1850 to 1865. Hung's uprising came at a time w'hen China was ripe for rebellion because of widespread unrest resulting from a series of devastating famines, a general disgust with increasing governmental corruption, and a growing resentment over western exploitation. During the early stages of the Taiping Rebellion American missionaries in China leaned toward supporting the Taipings because of Hung's proposed reforms. They were soon embarrassed, however, by Hung's continued insistence that he was Christ's brother and gradually shifted their support Brown Brothers lured here jre President Roosevelt and the envoys of sia and Japan prior to the opening of the Portsmouth ire Conference. Do you think Roosevelt assumed too a responsibility in world affairs in attempting to bitrate the Russo-Japanese War? Why, or why not? Ibing I iorea created fears among Roosevelt's advi- irsthatJapan might next contemplate athrust Southward toward the Philippines. These (fears were allayed in August, 1905, when iretary of War William Howard Taft (Root become Secretary of State) reached an informal agreement with Japanese Prime Minter Taro Katsura while on a good-will tour Asia. By the terms of the agreement the nited States accepted Japan's protectorate jver Korea and Japan disavowed any inten- of interfering in the Philippines. Though Taft-Katsura agreement brought a tempo- improvement in relations, the following they were once more being strained — lost to the point of war —by racial discrimination in California. Immigration and Discrimination. Between 1890 and 1905 some 50,000 to 75,000 Japanese, mostly agricultural laborers, came to California. This mass influx of Japanese immigrants resulted in a wave of racial discrimination something like that suffered by the Chinese during the 1870's —discrimination that had led to federal legislation banning Chinese immigration in 1882. Many Americans felt that Orientals posed a threat to American economic, social, and religious institutions because they worked harder for lower wages, retained old customs, showed little willingness to assimilate, and were not Christians. Reports of racial prejudice in California aroused concern in Japan. As people of a nation that had only recently obtained recognition as a major world power, the Japanese were highly sensitive to any form of discrimination. When the San Francisco School Board passed a resolution in October, 1906, requiring all Oriental children of school age in San Francisco to attend special segregated schools, angry protest demonstrations swept across Japan, and the Japanese press demanded that the Japanese government take action against the humiliation of its people. Alarmed by the outbreak of anti-Amer- icanism in Japan, Roosevelt assured the Japanese government that he would do all he could to protect the rights of Japanese nationals in California. Technically the President was limited in the action he could take because educational policy was a state matter. In addition, at that time racial segregation in schools had been upheld as constitutional by the Supreme Court in Plessy v. Ferguson. Although Roosevelt realized that his intervention in the San Francisco case might cost him support (particularly since in the early 1900's criticism of segregation was as unpopular in California as it was in the South), he was determined to prevent San Francisco's racial practices from undermining his Asian policy. He invited the entire San Francisco School Board to a White House conference and persuaded its members to vote down the segregation resolution after giving them assurance that he would obtain an agreement from the Japanese government to halt the emigration of laborers. A "Gentlemen's Agreement" on the matter was quickly reached with Japan through a series of diplomatic notes. In spite of this solution to the segregation issue, nationalists in both nations continued to create tensions. The Japanese press interpreted the Gentlemen's Agreement as compromising Japan's equality among nations, while American "yellow journalists" denounced the President for allowing a foreign power to exert influence on domestic policy. Meanwhile Roosevelt made several efforts to demonstrate American friendship toward Japan. In November, 1908, Secretary of State Root reached an agreement with Japanese ambassador Kogoro Takahira. By the terms of this agreement both nations pledged to respect each other's territorial possessions in the Pacific and to uphold the Open Door policy in China. With the Root-Takahira agreement, the tension between the two nations temporarily subsided. But though the relations between Japan and the United States had weathered serious strains by the outbreak of World War I, the legacy of ill will thus created significantly affected future relations. Review and Discussion 1. Why did the United States seek to open Japan to western contact? How was the opening of Japan accomplished? 2. What impact did relations with the western world have upon Japan? 3. What situations and problems caused friction between the United States and Japan in the early twentieth century? Conflict in the Far East During the early years of the twentieth century nationalist feeling increased in both Japan and China. Japan's victory over Russia in 1905 sparked the hope among ultranation- alists in Japan that their country would shape the destiny of Asia. Meanwhile the failure of the traditionalists in China to forge a powerful nation and to resist the drive of foreign powers led that country toward revolution. The Chinese revolutionaries, anxious to depart from tradition and give new leadership to their country, threatened Japanese ambitions for Asian supremacy. The conflict that developed between Chinese and Japanese nationalists eventually involved the United States as well as other western powers. Birth of the Chinese Republic. By the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, conditions within China had deteriorated to the point where revolution seemed inevitable. The ultraconservative Manchu dynasty reluctantly adopted some reforms, but these were not enough to assure the Chinese people of the government's ability to combat foreign advances in China. The massive discontent with the Chinese Imperial Government spawned numerous revolutionary groups, each dedicated to the overthrow of the government. The most significant was the China Renaissance Society organized by Sun Yat-sen. Educated in Hawaii, Sun was influenced by American ideals and institutions and believed that China had to be made into a democratic republic before it could become a strong national state. By the fall of 1911 the Chinese Imperial Government lost the last remnants of popular support. The emperor was forced to abdicate in January, 1912, when General Yuan Shih- kai, a former Manchu minister, agreed to support the revolutionary movement on the condition that he would head the new republican government. However, Congress passed the bill over his veto, only to have the Filipinos reject it because of the restrictions on immigration and trade. Congress then passed the McDuffie-Tyd- ings Act of 1934 which contained the same basic provisions of the Hawes-Cutting Bill, though immigration and trade provisions were altered to eliminate the Filipinos' objections. In addition, the act provided for the leasing of military bases in the Philippines. The following year the Commonwealth of the Philippines was established, and Manuel Quezon was elected President. Japanese occupation of the islands during World War II delayed independence until 1946, but on July 4 of that year the Philippines became a republic. Unlike most colonizing nations, the United States did not pursue a policy of divide and rule while it controlled the Philippines. It attempted to create a unified country governed to a large extent by native Filipinos. It allowed the people to retain their cultural heritage and to use Spanish in the schools. But the close relationship between the Catholic Church and the state was broken. Education was secularized, and much of the land owned by the Church was purchased and redistributed. Some critics of American policy in the Philippines have charged that the United States moved too rapidly during the early years by giving power to the Filipinos before they were fully trained for leadership. Others point out that Americans did not solve the problem of land ownership. Although many "eat, drink, and be merry" philosophy that heralded the beginning of a new moral code for American society. The nation also experienced severe tensions between the new and the old. Despite the fact that American society was becoming predominantly urban, many Americans clung tenaciously to traditional rural values and were fiercely intolerant of different ways and people. The conflict between the city — which symbolized an openness to new ideas, a tolerance for diversity, and a respect for the new science and technology— and the countryside — which stood for traditional religious, social, and political thought and remained hostile to new ideas and values —underlay many of the issues dividing America during this period. Conflicts over Americanism Henry Steele Commager has identified the decade of the 1890's as a "watershed" in which the characteristics of modern America emerged to flow into the twentieth century. One of these characteristics was the ethnic makeup of the "new" immigrants who came to this country from Southern and Eastern Europe like a rushing stream after 1890. The fact that Italians, Greeks, Slavs, Poles, and Russians looked, acted, and worshiped differently from most old-stock Americans gave rise to fears on the part of earlier immigrant groups that their way of life was threatened — that Americanism itself, as they defined it, was in danger of being contaminated. Novelist Kenneth Roberts even predicted that the "new" immigrants would produce "a hybrid race of people as worthless and futile as the good-for-nothing mongrels of Central America and Southeastern Europe." World War I distracted many Americans from the changes that were taking place in their society. However, once the war was over, the nature of "Americanism" became a matter of intense concern to groups believing that the future of American society, including its political, ethnic, and religious character, was at stake. Events in other parts of the world heightened their fears. The Red Scare. During World War I Russia was torn by internal strife that resulted in the establishment of a temporary democratic government in 1917. When the Bolsheviks (Communists) under Lenin wrested control from this government in November, 1917, Russia withdrew from the war. The installation of the Lenin regime was followed by more than two years of bloody civil war in Russia during which Lenin claimed that a worldwide revolution of workers against capitalistic systems was in process. As rumors spread that Communists in the United States were plotting a revolution, all radicals and aliens became suspect. Pressure was brought on the Wilson administration to move against the communists before they took over the United States. Attorney General Mitchell Palmer was quick to act. On the pretext of enforcing the wartime Sedition Act of 1918. Palmer began a series of raids in the fall of 1919 on union halls, radical organizations' headquarters, and private homes in search of Communists. Those who belonged to the Communist party, who were thought to be members, who associated with members, or who even appeared to be members were often arrested and, if they were aliens, deported. In one , instance, members of the Union of Russian Workers were arrested primarily because of their nationality and membership in that particular labor union. Many others were arrested not because they advocated forceful overthrow of the government but because they were socialists, anarchists, labor unionists, or just Russian immigrants. In numerous cases suspects were arrested on false charges, subjected to brutal treatment, and deprived of basic legal rights. Attorney General Palmer defended the justice Department's actions when he wrote of the supposed threats to the nation as follows: My information showed that communism in this country was an organization of thousands of aliens, who were direct allies of | Trotzky [Lenin's key aide in establishing a I communist regime in Russia]. ... it showed I that they were making the same glittering promises of lawlessness, of criminal autocracy to Americans, that they had made to the Russian peasants. How the Department of Justice discovered upwards of 60,000 of these I organized agitators of the Trotzky doctrine in the United States, is the confidential information upon which the Government is now I sweeping the nation clean of such alien filth. Although persecution of aliens and suspected Communists continued throughout much of the 1920's, the red scare itself died abruptly. Prisoners were released for lack of evidence when law enforcement officials began to resist the hysteria. It became clear that the Palmer raids had uncovered little evidence Ibis cartoon captured the mood of many Americans during the height of the Red Scare, when they thought all suspect [aliens should summarily be deported. Was there a basis ter the tear that gripped the nation? Would deportation have been a proper way to counter it? Why or why not? of any Communist plot against the American government; only a handful of subversive individuals were caught. But hundreds of innocent Americans were needlessly hurt by the scare. Antiforeignism. The original purpose of the Palmer raids —to protect the country from subversion —swelled into a wave of antiforeignism in the 1920's. Antagonism to foreigners was not new to American society, however. Even in colonial times Protestants had been suspicious of the immigration of Catholics and Jews into the colonies. A plea was made in the first Congress of the United States to bar entrance to "the common class of vagrants, paupers, and other outcasts of Europe." Yet the nativist movement (made up of opponents of unrestricted immigration) remained relatively minor until the beginning of a heavy influx of immigrants during the nineteenth century. The social strains of assimilating over thirty million aliens of diverse nationalities within a single century severely taxed the equalitarian traditions of American democracy. Fears of Catholicism prompted by the heavy immigration of Irish Catholics in the 1840's resulted in the "Know-Nothing" movement-called that because members of the secretive organization, when questioned about their membership, answered, "I know nothing." The movement began from various splinter groups that by the 1850's had banded together to form the American party. The party motto —"America for the Americans" — was, according to Know-Nothings, directed not at stopping immigration but at controlling its dangerous effects. With the threat of Civil War in the late 1850's, however, most Know-Nothings joined the new Republican party. There was only minimal antiforeign agitation in the first two decades after the Civil War. Perhaps this was due to the fact that sectional feelings were still dominant, that From New York Herald Tribune, reproduced by permission of W.C.C. Publishing Co., Inc. This 1920 cartoon reflects the response of many Americans to the flood of new immigrants in the twentieth century. The Russian fur hat worn by one of the immigrants is an indication of the link that existed between anti-communism and more general antiforeignism, the rate of immigration had lessened, and that the German and Irish minorities were gaining acceptance, having proved their loyalty to the Union in the Civil War. But in the 1880's and 1890's a new wave of antiforeignism developed when a flood of immigrants poured in from Southern and Eastern Europe and the Far East. Nativists formed such groups as the Asiatic Exclusion League and the American Protective Association to safeguard the United States from the "yellow peril" and "papal conspirators." They lobbied for federal legislation prohibiting Oriental and other "undesirable" immigration and supported and practiced ethnic and racial discrimination. Anglo-Saxon Supremacy. During the early 1920's antiforeignism became more closely coupled with the racism implicit in Social Darwinism, which had been popularized in the late nineteenth century. Those who favored strict immigration control supported their position with arguments extolling Anglo- Saxon supremacy. Popular stereotypes and myths were revived by Nordic nationalists who warned that American society and institutions were endangered by the hordes of colored peoples swarming in. Such ideas were reinforced by physical scientists who accepted racist categories as a framework for analyzing inherited traits. Professor Carl C. Brigham concluded in his Study of American Intelligence published in 1922 that "The intellectual superiority of our Nordic group over the Alpine, Mediterranean, and Negro groups has been demonstrated." To slow down what he believed would be an inevitable deterioration of American intelligence through intermarriage, Brigham called for legislation severely restricting immigration. Describing the prejudiced thinking on race that existed in the United States during the 1920's, historian John Higham has written: As scientific racism spread downward from patrician circles, it blended with the cruder Anglo-Saxon nativism that was pushing upward from the grass roots of the South and West. ... No one any longer, except possibly some immigrant spokesmen, claimed that America's genius derived from racial mixture.* The Ku Klux Klan. In the midst of this wave of intolerance the Ku Klux Klan experienced a remarkable revival. The Klan appealed to American patriotism inspired by the war and to deep-rooted prejudices held by many Americans. As in the post-Civil War period, the Klan was based primarily on intolerance of Negroes —this time occasioned by a fear that the Negro was rising too far too fast. Many Negroes had migrated to northern cities during the war and taken jobs alongside whites in factories or served in the armed forces. After the war, cries were heard across the country that Negroes should "be put in their place." Beatings, whippings, burnings, lynchings, and shootings quickly became associated with Klan methods of preserving the American system. Exposes of Klan acts of brutality and the profiteering of its leaders at the expense of the membership led to a rapid decline in its influence. By 1930 active membership had dropped well below 100.000. In the 1920's, thousands attended Ku Klux Klan parades like this one. The revival of the Klan was the most extreme manifestation of a widespread fear that the traditional American way of life was being jeopardized by minority group interests. The Klan justified its violent persecution of minorities on the grounds of "patriotism." Do you think this was a valid justification? Why or why not? Brown Brothers The Sacco-Vanzetti Case. The antiforeignism of the period was highlighted by the Sacco-Vanzetti murder case. In May, 1920, Italian-born Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti were arrested and charged with the murder of a paymaster in an attempted armed robbery of a shoe factory in South Braintree, Massachusetts. The two men were found guilty primarily because at the time of arrest Sacco had in his possession a pistol of the caliber of the murder weapon. The case might have attracted little attention were it not for persistent charges in the United States, as well as in Europe and South America, that the two defendants were victims of intolerance. People began asking whether Sacco and Vanzetti were judged guilty because of the evidence or because of their Italian birth and their ideological beliefs (both men were atheists, anarchists, and draft evaders during World War I). Appeals for a new trial, based in part on the discovery of new evidence, postponed their executions. But despite persistent doubts about the guilt of the two men, the presiding trial judge, Webster Thayer, who allegedly had strong prejudices against all radicals, refused to grant another trial. Governor Alvan T. Fuller of Massachusetts, who had the power to commute the sentence to life imprisonment, finally, under public pressure, appointed a committee to review the evidence. This committee concluded that Sacco and Vanzetti were "guilty beyond a reasonable doubt," and Fuller refused to exercise his power of executive clemency. Just before their executions commentator Walter Lippmann wrote why the case was so controversial: The Sacco-Vanzetti case is clouded and obscure. It is full of doubt. The fairness of the trial raises doubt. The evidence raises doubt. The inadequate review of the evidence raises doubt. The Governor's inquiry has not appeased these doubts. The report of his Advisory Committee has not settled these doubts. Everywhere there is doubt so VV/do World Photos The case of Sacco (center) and Vanzetti (right), which violent pro- and antiforeign sentiments made so notorious at the time, remains one of the most controversial in American history. Many people still believe political factors were responsible for the men's execution. With so much doubt existing, do you think Sacco and Vanzetti should have been executed? deep, so pervasive, so unsettling, that it cannot be denied and it cannot be ignored. No man, we submit, should be put to death where so much doubt exists. Quota Immigration. Intolerance against foreigners and fear of their intrusions into American society spurred many Americans and their political representatives to seek laws that would curtail the influx of immigrants. Before 1882 all foreigners could enter the United States without restriction. In 1882, however. Congress passed a bill that prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborersviewed as a threat by American workingmen because they would work for very low wages—for a period of ten years. This act was renewed in 1894 and again in 1902, without a terminal date. In 1907 Theodore Roosevelt negotiated his Gentlemen's Agreement whereby the Japanese government voluntarily refused to issue passports to emigrant Japanese laborers. Another effort to restrict immigration was the enactment of a literacy requirement that barred immigrants who could not read a minimum amount of English from entrance. Literacy test bills were vetoed by Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson; but the "exclusionists" in Congress finally obtained the necessary votes to pass a literacy requirement over Wilson's second veto in 1917. However, the literacy requirement did not substantially cut immigration, since most potential immigrants were willing to learn sufficient English to pass a simple literacy test in reading and writing. In the wake of World War I, millions of Europeans seeking to escape the frustrations of war-ravaged countries immigrated to the United States. Under pressure to protect the nation's traditions and dominant Anglo-Saxon stock. Congress enacted an emergency bill in 1920 placing immigration on a quota basis, When Wilson vetoed the bill, Congress passed a new act. The Immigration Act of 1921 limited annual immigration from any country to three percent of the people of that national origin living in the United States in 1910. A more permanent barrier to immigration was the Immigration Act of 1924 that not only reduced the national quotas established in 1921 but also shifted the base year on which the quotas were set to 1890, in a deliberate move to restrict immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe. One of its clauses excluded all Orientals, a provision that was viewed as a direct insult by Japanese and Chinese. In 1929 the National Origins Act set the quota at 150,000 immigrants per year, with distribution based on the national origins of the American population in 1920. With the passage of the quota acts many Americans hoped to preserve an American Political Shifting society that was predominantly white, northern European in origin, Protestant in religion, and Anglo-Saxon in cultural heritage. This effort to restrict immigration was only one as- Ipect of the struggle between the "old" America and the "new" that continued throughout the decade in political conflicts. Ironically, the passage of the National Origins Act of 1929 came too late to prevent "new" im- pgrants and their offspring from playing an increasingly important role in the nation's political, economic, and social life as the I920's progressed. Review and Discussion 1. Why were the "new" immigrants considered by some to be more of a threat to American life and institutions than the older immi- I grants? 2. What factors contributed to the revival of the Ku Klux klan after World War I? 3. What was the purpose of quota immigration? After eight years of Democratic administration, a Republican victory in the Presidential election of 1920 appeared a certainty. Wilson's failure to win Senate approval of the Versailles Treaty and the Covenant of the League of Nations signified the public's growing disaffection with Wilsonian idealism and the Democratic party. Because of this, the Republican national convention was particularly important, for it would in all likelihood nominate the next President. The leading candidates for the Republican nomination were such competent leaders as General Leonard Wood, Governor Frank Lowden of Illinois, and Senator Hiram Johnson of California. But when the convention deadlocked between Wood and Lowden, the delegates looked for a compromise candidate. St. Valentine's Day Massacre Inauguration of Herbert Hoover National Origins Act Stock market crash 1930 pluralistic society containing many nationality groups, religions, political attitudes, and ways of life. This change was not accepted by all Americans. Immigration was restricted in a futile effort to protect the old cultural unity of the previous century. At the same time, rural Americans made a last-ditch stand against urbanization and the multitude of evils they associated with city life by supporting prohibition and fundamentalism. They felt, with considerable justification, that the social and intellectual freedom that seemed to thrive in the cities threatened their beliefs and their way of life. But still their children left the farms in ever-increasing numbers, migrating to the city to find work in its factories. The factories that employed the sons and daughters of farmers and city immigrants side by side produced new products that radically changed American life. New businesses created enormous profits which resulted in soaring stock prices and created a business culture that reached into every aspect of American life. Economic abundance seemed to be within the reach of most Americans, and an already acquisitive society became even more marked by greed and materialism. But then the stock-market crash came as a jarring reminder that growth and progress must be accompanied by patience and restraint. In many respects the weaknesses of American society in the 1920's reflected its strengths. Intolerant attitudes failed to check the diversity of the American population, which then, as now, enriches the culture and spirit of the nation. Efforts to curtail intellectual and personal freedom did not prevent American writers and intellectuals from speaking out against narrow-mindedness and bigotry. Even the decade's materialism reflected the potentials of an economic system based on mass production in creating a new abundance of goods and leisure time for the common man. 