Marching to Augusta, Georgia, in May 1970, personalities call attention to national issues with Woodcut depicts German immigrants starting their trip to the United States. What layovers can they expect on their |o 1860 Immigration was largely responsible for the rapid growth of population after 1815. Hundreds of thousands of Europeans were disenchanted with conditions at home; and they were attracted by the exciting opportunities in the young republic and the opening of the American West. Immigration expanded in the thirties and forties, reaching floodtide in 1854 when 428,000 people came to the United States, a figure not to be equaled for twenty years. The statistics of immigration offer revealing and unmistakable evidence. Growth in Population from Immigration. The greatest number of immigrants came from Ireland and Germany. Between 1845 and 1860 approximately 1.5 million Irish came to the United States because of desperate famine conditions brought on by the failure of the potato crop. More than 1.5 million Germans, mostly from the Rhineland region, came to America between 1830 and 1860; some were political refugees, but the majority were seeking better economic conditions. Their home government often encouraged them to leave Germany and even assisted their departure by paying the ship's passage. The annual immigration from Germany tripled between 1850 and 1854, from 78,000 to 215,000. Although most Irish immigrants were peasant farmers, in America they became city laborers, merchants, and tradesmen, replacing many of the men and women who had moved to the Mississippi Valley. Most were so poor that they could not afford to travel inland, and they took the first jobs they could get. They settled primarily in New York and Boston, but some also settled in Philadelphia, Baltimore, and New Orleans. Wherever they decided to live, they were bound together by their Catholic faith, friends, anti-British politics, and the work opportunities available in the urban environment. Eventually when the Irish gained political control of many cities, scarcely an official could be elected who failed to win Irish support. More Germans settled in the Trans- Appalachian West than on the Atlantic seaboard. On their way west some stopped at Cincinnati and Louisville on the Ohio River and at St. Louis; in 1840 German immigrants cast one-third of the votes in Cincinnati. Other Germans followed the frontier, settling in Michigan, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Minnesota; Chicago and Milwaukee had huge sections of Germans. Letters from friends and relatives in the United States brought newcomers to the states and cities where those who preceded them had settled. Many husbands, sons, and brothers came in advance and were joined by the rest of the family as soon as passage money was available. Immigrants also came from all parts of Great Britain (Scotland, England, Wales), Norway, Sweden, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, and Switzerland. Some migrated to the western regions immediately; other remained in the East. Choice of settlement depended upon the individual's skills and background. Where the Immigrants Settled: 1830-1860 Explain the relationship between geography and heavy concentrations of immigrants. Only a small fraction of the immigrants were members of the professions or skilled workers. The South attracted fewer immigrants proportionately than the North. Yet by I860, 21 percent of the population of Savannah, Georgia, and 31 percent of the population of Memphis, Tennessee, were foreign born. The competition of slave labor dampened the appeal the South may have had; besides, the rich soil of the sparsely settled prairies was a greater inducement to newcomers than the land available in the South. Americans, even if they were Americans for only a few years, sometimes resented the foreign born. For some reason native-born Americans felt superior to the foreign born, an attitude called nativism. Native Americans were suspicious of newcomers because of religious or racial prejudice and competition for jobs or land. In the cities storekeepers and factory owners frequently posted signs that warned "No Irish Need Apply." Resentment of the newcomers spread. Groups of men assembled to fight immigration, and in 1849 the Order of the Star Spangled Banner, a national organization, was founded. Its members were called Know-Nothings because when asked about the order, the response was "I know nothing." Anti-Catholic sentiment took serious and violent forms. Irish and German Catholic immigrants were viewed as agents of the pope and as parties to a conspiracy to undermine the liberties of the United States. The Reverend Lyman Beecher wrote a pamphlet in 1845, called Plea for the West, in which he spread the word to save the West for Protestantism. The inventor of the telegraph, Samuel F. B. Morse, became the president of the American Protestant Union. He wrote countless pamphlets, articles, and books vehemently condemning the Catholics. His purpose was to end the migration of Catholics to the United States. Such prejudice was fed by a propaganda barrage of innuendo, sermons, and newspaper articles. Books and newspaper headlines aroused mobs to burn convents and commit other acts of violence. More encouraging was the help given immigrants to find jobs and places to live. Immigrants tried to identify themselves as soon as possible as Americans. Every major American development in textile manufacturing, the building of roads, farming- ranching, and the improvement of education reflected the presence and influence of the immigrant. 1 Use evidence to support the statement "The whole nation was flourishing." 2 How do you account for the large numbers of northern Europeans immigrating to the United States between 1815 and 1860? What adjustments did immigrants have to make when settling in the United States? What factors help to explain the attitude of hostility against immigrants? The development of transportation and communication effected a fundamental alteration in the economic alignment between sections of the country. The Northwest—those states west of the Appalachians and north of the Ohio— transported their foodstuffs to a lucrative market in the South by way of inland rivers. The East-West transportation system of waterways and railroads strengthened the tie between the Northwest and the East while weakening the tie between the Northwest and the South. The depression after the Panic of 1837 brought an abrupt decline to United States trade with other countries. In 1843 the total value of goods exported was $125 million. Less than twenty years later (1860) the value of goods imported and exported had increased five times to $687 million. Imports of manufactured goods tended to exceed exports of raw materials. American gold, largely from the California gold mines, was sent abroad to make up the balance. For many years cotton was the most valuable export, but wheat and flour gradually gained on cotton. Three-fourths of American exports were carried in American ships. The most romantic ocean transport was the clipper, the sovereign of the sea from the 1840s to the 1860s. The clippers could not carry as much cargo, but they carried it much faster. A clipper sailing from New York to San Francisco around the tip of South America could make the trip in eighty-nine days, or seventy days less than in other ships. During the 1850s the British, to compete with the clippers, began to build ocean-going steamships which eventually gained supremacy. In the 1850s steamboat traffic reached its peak on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and even on the Missouri River. Perhaps as The canal system facilitated the distribution of goods. Why did water transportation cost less than overland? many as 740 vessels were engaged in passenger and cargo traffic. New Orleans alone tabulated 3,566 steamboat arrivals. The competition was so fierce that rates were reduced, and occasionally rivalry bankrupted owners. A challenge to steamboats on the Ohio and Mississippi was the canal boom. The Erie Canal was so successful that all over the country canals were being constructed and rivers made navigable. The full effect of the East-West business traffic via the canals began to be felt in the 1840-1860 period. As early as 1838 Buffalo, New York, at the western end of the Erie canal was receiving more grain and flour than New Orleans, thus proving the importance of its geographic position in drawing produce from the Northwest to the East. In 1836, 80 percent of the tonnage carried over the Erie Canal eastward originated in western New York. By 1853, the tonnage carried on the Erie from the western states was 200 percent greater than that originating in western New York. The Ohio and Erie Canal completed in 1846 connected the Ohio River with Cleveland, the Illinois and Michigan Canal was finished in 1848 and linked Lake Michigan with the Illinois River; the Wabash and Erie Canal, linking Evansville, Indiana, with Toledo, Ohio, was opened in 1853. These canals drew cargo away from the Ohio River and into the orbit of the Great Lakes. The Welland Canal, built by the Canadian government, joined Lake Erie to Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence River and enabled traffic on the Great Lakes to avoid Niagara Falls. The speedy clipper ship. Andrew Jackson, brought travelers to California in 1860. What could passengers do on board for a hundred days? Italian immigrants take a break from work. What standard of living could they expect to achieve in ten years? An American born in 1860, the year of Lincoln's election, opened his eyes on a world in which most people lived on farms, in villages, or in small towns, and almost three out of five Americans made their living from agriculture. By 1900, at age forty, this same American could see about him a new and different world that had been created during his lifetime. Industrial labor now came first, and only two out of five Americans made their living in agricultural labor. The United States had fallen into the line of march of modern industrial nations and had quickly made its way into the front ranks. The country had grown in every way: there were 4.7 million more farmers and almost 12 million more workers than in 1860. In the course of this sweeping change, the United States found and developed its rich natural resources—vast amounts of coal, oil, iron, and other metals and a soil fertile enough to feed its new millions. But it was short on two vital elements: capital and labor. Capital in large amounts was borrowed from Europe. The industrial labor force was recruited from two basic sources: the surplus farm population at home and a great and steady flow of immigrants. Opportunities did not grow as fast on farms as in the cities, and young farm people were constantly moving from rural to city areas. Millions of immigrants came from Europe and the Orient, drawn by American wages and by dreams of equality and opportunity. Both the Americans from rural areas and the immigrants who moved into the industrial communities found themselves in a strange new world. Enterprising farm boys had felt the strong pull of the city even in the years before the Civil War, but the attraction became stronger after the war as industry expanded and offered new opportunities. The cities seemed more and more glamorous to youths who were tired of the hard routine and the dreariness of life on the farm and who were eager for advancement. Farm newspapers urged the young to stay with the pure, healthy life of the country and to avoid the temptations of the city. The bankers and brokers are wealthy. They take in their thousands or so; Ah! think of the frauds and deceptions— Don't be in a hurry to go. The farm is the safest and surest; The orchards are loaded today. You're free as the air of the mountains. And monarch of all you survey. Better stay on the farm a while longer Though profits come in rather slow; Remember you've nothing to risk, boys— Don't be in a hurry to go. But many young men were in a hurry to go to the city, and others had to go simply because it was easier to make a living there. Some country areas were losing large numbers of their people to cities, particularly in the Noith Atlantic states and in the Middle West. Between 1880 and 1890 over half the rural townships of Iowa and Illinois were losing population while cities in the same states were growing rapidly. More than nine out of ten townships in New England lost in population; farms and houses were abandoned ; even the greater parts of whole villages were deserted. During the depression of the 1890s when agriculture was hard hit, the city lights looked brighter than ever (see p. 461). Not all farm boys, however, trusted the city. The young writer Hamlin Garland wondered, when he first reached Chicago, whether he could get from one side of the city to the other without having his money stolen. He entered upon a literary life in the big city, but many young men found jobs in factories, stores, and offices. An immigrant on the move in 1900 Can you determine his country of origin from his clothing? Although the most dramatic change in the American working population in the 1870- 1900 period was the great increase of industrial workers, the new conditions of life also created a demand for white-collar workers. As businesses grew bigger and more complex, they needed great numbers of office workers—men and women who could write letters and keep records and accounts. Retail establishments were multiplying with astounding rapidity and were requiring store clerks and more commercial travelers or traveling salesmen. The skills and abilities needed for these occupations were being taught in the expanding high school systems of the country. Many ambitious young men came to the cities from the farms, attracted by the familiar legend of the opportunity to rise from "rags to riches" through diligence and prudence. Very few rose from clerical positions to top jobs in business. Nevertheless, most stayed at work in offices because their work was less tiring and monotonous and paid almost twice as much as the work of men in factories and mills. In 1890 the average salaried clerk. Great Britain. Ireland. Norway. Sweden. Iceland. Denmark. Germany. Netherlands. Belgium. Luxembourg. Switzerland. France NEW Russia. Rumania. Turkey (Europe). Bulgaria. Italy. Poland. Spam, Portugal. Greece. Austria- Hungary. Czechoslovakia, Jugoslavia. Latvia. Estonia. Lithuania. Finland Canada. Newfoundland. Mexico, other America China. Japan. Turkey (Asia), other Asia the Scandinavian countries of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden. Those who arrived after 1880 were considered "new" immigrants. They came from southern and eastern Europe: from Italy, Greece, Austria- Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey, Russian Poland, and Russia. The old immigration did not end in 1880; but the stream of new immigrants swelled into a rushing torrent by the end of the nineteenth century and during the first years of the twentieth century. As settlers the old immigrants had certain practical advantages over the new immigrants: many of them already spoke English; many were Protestants and thus were not vulnerable to anti-Catholic or anti-Jew- ish prejudice; many came with special mechanical skills or, like the Germans, with enough capital to establish a farm. There was still much good free or cheap land on which state immigration agencies and land grant railroads were eager to help the newcomers settle. A large number of British immigrants were skilled workers drawn by high American wages who found that their training was in great demand. With their help the United States was able to catch up with and then surpass British industry. The new immigrants suffered greater hardships than the old immigrants. Their customs and traditions were very different from those of Americans; often they had to live in places where those differences seemed not only strange but were considered marks of inferiority. Before 1880 the new immigrants came in such small numbers annually that they were not highly visible. Also, the total number of immigrants from all countries in this period was not nearly as large as it would become at the beginning of the twentieth century. The biggest immigration year before 1900 was 1882, when 789,000 people came. Immigration slackened during the 1890s because of the depression of 1893 (see p. 436) and fell as low as 229,000 in 1897. But then it began a sharp turn upward. During each of six years between 1905 and 1915 more than a million immigrants arrived. In the first fifteen years of the new century the United States absorbed the astonishing total of 9.5 million people from other countries, or more than half as many immigrants as had come in the preceding eighty years. It was little wonder that the problems of the new immigrants attracted an enormous amount of attention. Scores of books and hundreds of articles were written about them. The new ethnic mixture became a striking feature of American cities and a national political issue. Jewish boy in his prayer shawl welcomes the New Year in New York. different from that of the others pictured here? Immigrants like these came to the United States around 1900. Would it be necessary for them to abandon their native customs to survive here? The new immigrants arrived at a time when immigration was coming to be less welcome than before. Employers, of course, were happy to add these new recruits to the labor force. But native workers and those who tried to speak for them feared that the newcomers would compete with them for jobs and lower their wages. Cheap or free land seemed to be running out, and it was clear that further masses of immigrants would have to be crowded in the slum neighborhoods of the great cities. Old- fashioned Americans were afraid that the immigrants would cling to their native languages and customs and would not become Americanized. Political reformers in the cities feared them as tools for the bosses and the political machines, while intolerant Protestants and prohibitionists disliked them for their religion or for their use of wine and beer. The new immigrants, eager for work, were in the main industrious and law-abiding citizens, and the new American prosperity was built largely upon the strength of their work in industry. Moreover, by taking the poorest and the hardest jobs, they were supporting the rise in incomes and the social standing of the very groups that protested against them. They introduced variety into American life, adding immeasurably to its color and interest. In time they showed their ability to enter the mainstream of American life without giving up either their identity or their distinctive qualities. Immigrants from Europe were pulled by the attractions of America and pushed by oppression or misfortune at home. Germans came in order to avoid compulsory military service and to escape the other persecutions of the era of Bismarck, the Iron Chancellor, and the German imperial drive for greater national power. Jews came from Russia and Russian Poland to escape murderous pogroms. Elsewhere crop failures or malaria epidemics speeded Italians or Croatians on As Europe launched upon an expensive armaments race and a rivalry for colonial expansion, taxes became heavier, and compulsory military service caused many young men to seek haven in a country where there was no military draft. Letters arrived in the villages of Europe from relatives or friends, describing the wonders of America—high wages, religious freedom, political independence—and encouraging others to follow them. The voyage to America was not something to be taken lightly. A long overland journey, perhaps on foot, had to be made to a seaport that offered transatlantic passage. Crossing the ocean in steerage meant living in a crowded, filthy deck deep in the ship's hull. Fortunately the new steamships made the voyage in from six to ten days, compared with six weeks or more in a ship under sail. Next came debarkation in a strange city in a strange land, an ordeal which began with the terrifying question whether one would be allowed to enter the country. Finally, a new life had to be built in the New World: jobs and housing had to be found in a strange city where an unfamiliar language was spoken. Most of the immigrants from continental Europe came from peasant villages, and their skills were limited to those needed on the farm or in the small town. Now they had to learn to work in mills and factories and at the same time get accustomed to the ways of city life. Immigrants might be met by relatives or friends who had no design other than to help them. But others, with more selfish purposes, were there, too: money merchants who were ready to exchange their native currencies for dollars; bosses of labor gangs who, for a price, would get them contracts in industry; sweatshop operators who would give them arduous work for minimum wages; and finally swindlers of all types who had nothing at all to offer them except misfortune and deceit. Despite the hardships, there were always men eager to come. Which groups rejected the immigrants? Selig Perlman says in his book A Theory of the Labor Movement (1928) that the labor union viewed the immigrant as a competitive menace. The overshadowing problem of the American Labor movement has always been ... staying organized. No other labor movement has ever had to contend with the fragility so characteristic of American labor organizations. In the main, this ... has come from the lack of class cohesiveness in American labor.... Next to the abundant economic opportunities available to wage earners in this country, and to their children, immigration has been the factor most guilty of the incohesiveness of American labor. To workers employed in a given industry, a new wave of immigrants, generally of a new nationality, meant a competitive menace to be fought off and to be kept out of that industry. For, by the worker's job consciousness, the strongest animosity was felt not for the employer who had initiated or stimulated the new immigrant wave, but for the immigrants who came and took the jobs away. When immigrants of a particular nationality acquired higher standards and began rebuilding the unions which they destroyed at their coming, then a new nationality would arrive to do unto the former what these had done unto the original membership. The restriction of immigration .. . has at last done away with this phenomenon, which formerly used to occur and recur with an inevitable regularity. five Society in Warsaw tells how one European felt about coming to America: "I want to go to America, but I have no means at all because I am poor and have nothing but the ten fingers of my hands, a wife and 9 children. I have no work at all, although I am strong and healthy and only 45 years old. I cannot earn for my family. I have already been in Dombrowa, Sosnowiec, Zawiercie and Lodz, wherever I could go, and nowhere could I earn well. And here Milton M. Gordon comments in Assimilation in American Life: The Roie of Race. Religion and National Origins (1964) that the old immigrants considered themselves superior to the new immigrants. The new sources of foreign-born augmentation from the relatively unfamiliar lands and cultures of Italy, Russia. Austria-Hungary, and the Balkans were attracting unfavorable attention from many older Americans. Arriving at a time when the western frontier was rapidly closing and was soon closed, they huddled in the urban slums and took their economic places on the lowest rungs of the industrial ladder. And now the unfamiliar notes of a new. or at least hitherto unemphasized, chord from the nativist lyre began to sound the ugly chord, or discord, of racism. Previously vague and romantic notions of Anglo-Saxon peoplehood were combined with general ethnocentrism, rudimentary wisps of genetics, selected tidbits of evolutionary theory, and naive assumptions from an early and crude imported anthropology ... to produce the doctrine that the English, Germans, and others of the "old immigration" constituted a superior race of tall, blonde, blue-eyed "Nordics" or "Aryans," whereas the peoples of Eastern and Southern Europe made up the darker Alpines or Mediterraneans—both inferior breeds whose presence in America threatened either by intermixture or supplementation, the traditional American stock and culture. From Assimilation in American Life: The Role of Race, Religion, and National Origins by Milton M. Gordon. Copyright C> 1964 by Oxford University Press, Inc. Reprinted by permission. [his children] call for food and clothing, and more or less education, I wish to work, not easily only but even hard, but what can I do? I will not go to steal and I have no work. So I beg the Protective Association to accept me for this journey and not only me, but I should like to take with me two of my children, a boy 16 and a girl 18 years old. And I beg the Association. There are still other people who would readily go to America. . . . They are also poor. " This messenger boy working for the MacKay Telegraph Company in Waco. Texas, with his counterpart. Dannie Mercurio in Washington. D.C.. posed for photographer Lewis Hine. What was Hine saying to the social conscience of the day? Anti-Cninese discrimination erupted into violent hostility after the depression of the 1870s. Prejudice and riots led to the Exclusion Act of 1882. Comment on the assimilation of the Chinese into the American "mainstream." Why was discrimination against them different from that experienced by other groups? Especially difficult was the situation of the Chinese laborer in the Far West. Under the terms of the Burlingame Treaty with China in 1868 Chinese were permitted to emigrate to the United States. Chinese laborers were employed at the hardest jobs for the lowest wages, particularly on construction gangs building the western end of the first transcontinental railroad. By the 1870s as many as 75,000 Chinese workmen had emigrated to the United States, most of them to California, where one out of every five workers was Chinese. When the depression of 1873 struck the country and unemployment was rampant, native American workers who feared the Chinese would take their jobs became more prejudiced against them. An anti-Chinese movement began among American workers, and in a few instances Chinese were attacked and some killed. The new state constitution for California, adopted in 1879, prohibited Chinese from owning property and following certain occupations. In the same year, opponents of Chinese immigration persuaded Congress to adopt a Chinese Exclusion bill, but President Hayes vetoed it on the grounds that it violated the Burlingame Treaty. The Chinese government agreed to accept regulation of immigration by the United States. In 1882 Congress passed a Chinese Exclusion Act, which remained in effect until World War II. This act forbade the immigration of Chinese laborers and denied American citizenship to Chinese born in China. In 1885 Congress repealed the Contract Labor Law, which had been adopted by Congress in 1864 when the Civil War had created a serious labor shortage. This law attempted to revive the old indenture system. It permitted American employers to sign workmen in Europe to contracts stipulating that they come to the United States to work at stated wages for a stated period of time. It was illegal for the worker to leave his job before the contract expired. American workers objected to this system of recruiting labor. They argued that it was a kind of slave-labor system, and that it subjected American workers to the competition of cheap foreign labor. Actually, the supply of laborers under the Contract Labor Law had never been as steady or as large as expected, since few workers had been willing to come on unfavorable terms. Contract workers were often incompetent, and many skipped out on their contracts before they expired. 1 Identify and analyze evidence of popular American resistance to immigration. 2 Why did immigrants come to the United States ? 3 Compare California and federal policies regarding Chinese immigration. What values and attitudes are implicit in those policies? 4 What was the system of "contract labor" ? 5 Should immigrants be "Americanized" ? The developing need Although industrial wages in the United States were the highest in the world, the rapid expansion of industry in this period imposed many hardships on factory workers. In the early years of the century, when factories were small, owners often knew their employees personally and took an interest in their welfare. But as factory units became larger, employers became more impersonal. As early as 1883 a brass worker observed: "Well, I remember that fourteen years ago the workmen and foremen and the boss were all as one happy family; it was just as easy and free to speak to the boss as anyone else, but now the boss is superior, and the men all go to the foremen; but we would not think of looking the foreman in the face now any more than we would the boss. . . . The average factory hand growing up in the shop now would not think of speaking to the boss, would not presume to recognize him, nor the boss would not recognize him either." As larger factories were built, the mechanization of production increased, and factory work became routinized and monotonous. Not only were the pleasures of craftsmanship lost, but now the machine set the pace of work. The employer was free to pay low wages for long hours of work in unsanitary, unhealthy, and poorly lit factories. Many employers agreed with the railroad magnate, Jay Gould, that labor was simply a commodity whose price would in the long run be controlled by the law of supply and demand. One manufacturer declared bluntly to Samuel Gompers, the trade union leader (see p. 457) : "I regard my employees as I do a machine, to be used to my advantage, and when they are old and of no further use I cast them in the street." A New England manufacturer remarked that when "workers get starved down to it, then they will go to work at just what you can afford to pay." Wages for unskilled workers tended to be about $125 to $1.50 a day, and during the last third of the century wage rates did not much improve. A workingman reported to a Senate committee in 1883: "I have a brother who has four children besides his wife and himself. All he earns is $1.50 a day. He works in the ironworks at Fall River. He only works about nine months out of twelve. There is generally about three months of stoppage, taking the year right through, and his wife and his family all have to be supported for a year out of the wages of nine months—$1.50 a day for nine months out of twelve, to support six of them. It does not stand to reason that these children and he himself can have natural food or be naturally dressed. ' ' Prices fell in succeeding years, the small wages of employed workers did buy more goods, and an observant worker who was regularly employed might notice that his condition improved. But many workers were not regularly employed. Periodically perhaps as many as one in ten was out of work during normal times. During the severe depressions of 1873 and 1893 mass unemployment became a tremendous social problem. Hours of labor were long and grueling. Most employees in private industry worked a ten-hour day and a six-day week; in the steel industry and in some other industries they worked as much as eighty hours a week. Work was often as hazardous as it was tiring, and safeguards for workers on dangerous jobs were not provided. There was little legislation that required safety devices. Fatigue and carelessness took a heavy toll. Accidents were particularly heavy in the railway industry, where speed was a constant concern. Many insurance companies would not insure railroad workers because they were bad risks. Workers' homes provided little comfort. Large cities did not do much to provide for the industrial workers who came in with the new factories. Housing, sewerage, water suddIv. schools, and police and fire Drotec- "Between Halsted Street and the river live about ten thousand Italians— Neapolitans, Sicilians, and Calabrians, with an occasional Lombard or Venetian. To the south on Twelfth Street are many Germans, and side streets are given over almost entirely to Polish and Russian Jews. Still farther south, these Jewish colonies merge into a huge Bohemian colony, so vast that Chicago ranks as the third Bohemian city in the world. To the northwest are many Canadian-French, clannish in spite of their long residence in America, and to the north are Irish and first-generation Americans." Where do you suppose this immigrant family came from in 1900? George Eastman House 1 Which ethnic groups have lost their identities over the years and become "American"? Is the United States a "melting pot"? Explain. 2 Did rural Americans move to the cities where foreign immigrants had settled (see p. 509) ? What characteristics of culture separated the urban immigrant from the rural American of 1910? demnity, elsewhere Roosevelt was hailed for his mediation; for these efforts he won the Nobel Peace Prize. In 1905 William Howard Taft and Japanese Foreign Minister Tarokatsura arrived at an agreement under which the United States allowed Japan to occupy Korea. President Roosevelt knew that he did not have the power to interfere in Korea, but it was imperative to keep Japan friendly and contented. It would never do to let Japan conquer the Philippines, which were weak and vulnerable because Congress shrank from the cost of defending them. In mediating the War, Theodore Roosevelt was uncertain as to th outcome, but he won the 1906 Nobel Peace Prizr for his efforts. Ho long did the The problem of immigration disturbed Jap- anese-American relations. In 1900 Tokyo consented to refuse passports to workers who were bound for the United States, but Japanese laborers continued to find their way to America through Hawaii, Mexico, and Canada. In California there was a strong prejudice against Asians; Chinese immigrants had already been excluded (see p. 450). Now anti-Japanese feeling began to manifest itself, and in 1906 San Francisco segregated Asian school children. When the Japanese protested about this to Washington, Roosevelt responded that he too objected to "the outrageous agitation" of the Californians. But he pointed out that it was not in his power to silence sensational newspapers that attacked the Japanese or to control the actions of the California state legislature or to prevent racial discrimination in immigration policy without the agreement of Congress. The State Depart ment settled the crisis with an informal understanding in the ' ' Gentlemen's Agreement" of 1907. Japan promised to withhold passports for workers who wanted to migrate to the United States and accepted the right of the United States to bar Japanese trying to enter on passports issued for travel to other nations. The San Francisco school board order was withdrawn. The Japanese-American crisis not only started a general discussion of immigration policies in the United States but also aroused some loose talk about a possible war with Japan. Roosevelt seized upon the occasion to encourage Congress to push ahead with building up the navy. In 1907, to demonstrate American strength, Roosevelt decided to send the American fleet around the world on a practice cruise. Surprisingly, Japan welcomed the visit of the fleet as a friendly gesture, and Japanese-American relations actually improved. In 1908, as a part of Roosevelt's efforts to come to an understanding with Japan, the Root-Takahira Agreement was negotiated. This was an executive agreement which bound only Roosevelt's administration and the existing regime in Japan. Both powers promised to maintain the status quo in the Pacific area, to uphold the Open Door in China, and to support peacefully China's "independence and integrity." Its silence about Manchuria suggested that the United States acquiesced in Japan's special interest there. What was the significance of the Treaty of Kanagawa? How did Roosevelt become involved in the Russo-Japanese War? 3 Discuss the terms of the settlement between Russia and Japan. What conditions necessitated the "Gentlemen's Agreement"? How would the Japanese-American crisis of 1907 probably be handled today? sso Select a topic and research the questions asked. Medicine and War 1 How many Americans died from disease in the Spanish-American War? 2 What contributions to medicine did Dr. Walter Reed make at the time of this war? 3 What medical advances that we tend to take for granted today were not available in 1900? Secretaries of State The following men served as Secretaries of State during this period of imperialism: James G. Blaine, John W. Foster, Walter Q. Gresham, Richard Olney, John Sherman, and John Hay. 1 What experience did each have that would qualify him for service as Secretary of State? 2 What negotiations did each work on ? 3 Who did the most for relations between the United States and Latin America? 1 Reread the comments of Senator Lodge and Carl Schurz on imperialism (pp. 542-543). What do you think Lodge meant by "peace" and "order" ? Contrast Lodge's remarks about liberty for the Filipinos and the Declaration of Independence. What do you think Schurz meant when he said that imperialism would create attitudes and behavior dangerous to democracy? 2 State your opinion about the United States in 1900 from the viewpoint of (a) a Filipino; (b) an Hawaiian; (e) a Chinese; (d) a Japanese. Are their views important to you ? Formulate two questions for each statement. Some questions are more significant than others. How can you tell the difference ? "Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,... that it is the duty of the United States to demand ... that the government of Spain at once relinquish its authority and government on the island of Cuba and withdraw its land and naval forces from Cuba and Cuban waters."—Congress, April 1898 "Of colonization, as of all other growths, it is true that it is most healthy when it is most natural. Therefore colonies that spring from the felt wants and natural impulses of a whole people will have the most solid foundations." —Alfred T. Mahan, 1894 "President Favors Diplomacy/Congress Favors Force '^—Nav York World headline, March 26, 1898 The Spanish-American War and the acquisition of the Philippines marked a departure from the traditional touchstones of foreign policy: isolationism, neutrality, and adherence to the Monroe Doctrine. Which of the following interpretations seems most valid? Emphasis on Influential Personalities The responsibility for Cuba and the Philippines must be borne by William Randolph Hearst, who tampered with public opinion, and Theodore Roosevelt, who prepared for action in the Pacific. Emphasis on Multiple Causation Granted the political, diplomatic, economic, social, etc, causes of the Spanish-American War, the question becomes one of relative importance. For instance, to what extent was United States intervention in Cuba the result of humanitarian rather than political or economic motives? Emphasis on Continuity or Abrupt Change The Spanish-American War could be either the natural consequence of the Monroe Doctrine or an isolated situation unrelated to historical precedent. Do you think there are parallels between the Spanish-American War and the wars in were innocent; even more were sure that, innocent or guilty, they had never had a fair trial. Long afterward scholarly studies tended to support the likelihood of their guilt, but worldwide protests focused a good deal of critical attention on American justice. 1 Contrast the mood of the people before and after World War I. 2 Identify some of the obstacles confronting the steel strikers of 1919. 3 Cite evidence to illustrate the general fear of communism and anarchy around 1920. 4 Would you expect a generally conservative reaction after the idealism of Wilson? Explain. In the postwar period there was a strong reaction against all things foreign. Many Americans disliked people from the Central Powers because they had been our enemies. Some distrusted former Allies because they did not pay their war debts. Others had no love for immigrants from any of these countries because they fostered radical ideas or they were identified with the European system, which Americans repudiated. Businessmen and workers joined in the movement against immigration. Businessmen with a surplus labor force during the depression of 1920-1922 wanted no more new Americans who would bring in "foreign ideas." The workers wanted no more competition threatening their standard of living. A strong anti-immigration agitation, led by the Immigration Restriction League, had been mounting since 1894. Before World War I the primary proposal for immigration restriction was a literacy test, which would have the effect of excluding many of the new immigrants from peasant areas in South and Central Europe. Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson had all vetoed bills specifying some measure of literacy as a condition for entry into the United States. Wilson, who believed this measure would close opportunity in America for the poor, vetoed a bill in 1917, but it was passed over his veto. This bill prescribed that aliens over sixteen who could not read either their own language or English could not go beyond Ellis Island. During the war immigration had almost ceased, but in 1920 and 1921 more than three hundred thousand Italians entered the country. This new wave of immigrants made it clear that the literacy test was not a major barrier. Now those opposed to further immigration fought for new methods. The Immigration Restriction Act of 1921, allotting a quota to each European nation, was expected to limit immigration to about 350,000 persons. Each countrys quota was 3 percent of the number of its nationals living in the United States in the base year 1910. This meant, for example, that if there were 100,0 persons of Hungarian birth in the United States in 1910, only 3,000 Hungarians could enter in any given year from this time forward. The next piece of legislation was the National Origins Act of 1924, which cut quotas to 2 percent based on the year 1890. Most Asiatics were already barred from the United States, but this act also closed the door tightly on Japanese immigrants. The Act of 1924 was to govern immigration until 1927, after which immigrants from Europe were limited to 150,000 each year; this quota was based upon the foreign-born residents of 1920. These laws naturally affected immigration totals. Between 1905 and 1914 the annual immigration from all countries often ran over a million (see p. 446). The number fell off sharply during the war, but after the law of 1924 it never exceeded the 335,000 reached in 1927. During the depression of the 1930s and World War II, immigration declined to a mere trickle. Such measures, designed to bar Europeans, did not prevent immigration from the Western Hemisphere. During the 1920s almost a million Canadians, many of them French-speaking, came to work in the factories of northern New England; and at least half a million Mexicans crossed the borders to work in the fields of the Southwest. Puerto Ricans, always free of quota restrictions, came in large numbers in the prosperous 1940s. Important to American social development was the movement of southern Negroes to northern cities. About 400,000 Negroes served in the armed forces during World War I. Thousands of Negroes found greater work opportunities in the industries of the North during and just after the war. The 850,000 Negroes in the North in 1910 increased to 1.4 million in 1920. Moving into the unfamiliar precincts of northern cities, they often found that they had exchanged the rural poverty of the South for the ghetto poverty of the North. They also encountered increasing prejudice and bitter discrimination. The year 1919 was one of startling racial violence in northern cities. There were twenty-six race riots that summer, topped by the Chicago riot in which twenty-three blacks and fifteen whites lost their lives and hundreds were injured. Northern cities did offer new opportunities to Negroes in teaching, law, medicine, journalism, the skilled trades, sports, and entertainment on stage and screen. A few blacks made striking achievements and set new levels of aspiration for their people. Immigration dropped to its lowest level in 1933 (see pp. 446-447). How many immigrants were there in that year? What caused this low number? Has immigration correlated with prosperity in the history of the United States? Every year before 1933 more people moved away from farms than to farms. Why did this fail to happen in 1933? in hundred thousands A crowd of black people with empty pails and shopping bags wait in line for relief supplies during the depression. In ironic contrast, the billboard behind them shows a smiling white family and proclaims the joys of the "American Way." Was the movement of black Americans from the South to northern and western states a result of the boom or the bust? Did black migration coincide with the slowing of immigration (see p. 591)? What happened to birth and marriage rates in the 1930s? Did the depression affect divorce rates? Does the information imply that prosperity causes more births? more divorces? in thousands per 1000 population 1 Was the geographic mobility of United States citizens greater during the 1920s boom or the 1930s bust? Compare the mobility of Americans in those decades with their mobility in the 1830s (see p. 219). Which demographic change discussed on these pages—immigration, rural or black migration, birth, marriage, or divorce, rates—most affects the United States today? Did the geographical separation of the Axis sphere of influence affect the war? How? The Axis at Their Peak: 1942 presented a strong threat to the Western Hemisphere. It was deemed intolerable that the Axis should be allowed to penetrate Latin America. Germany appeared more likely than Japan to achieve some revolutionary advance in military technology that would put the Allies at a tremendous disadvantage. Britain, wholly engaged in fighting the Axis, was a far more effective ally in the Atlantic than the increasingly enfeebled China was in the Pacific. The Nazis' attack on the Soviet Union after June 1941 supplied another reason for concentrating on the European theater. It was important to shore up the Russians, lest the Germans absorb Russia and have the use of its enormous resources. Hence, when Churchill came to Washington in December 1941, he found Americans already in agreement with his belief that the defeat of Germany would leave Japan exposed to the overwhelming force of the Allied powers, whereas the defeat of Japan would not bring the war to an end. Some Americans were restless over a decision to withhold full American striking power from the enemy that had attacked Pearl Harbor in order to concentrate on Europe. But in the end, the Allied strategy justified itself. Two great victories in the Pacific in the spring of 1942 strengthened hope that Japan could be held off while the European war went on. The first was the Battle of the Coral Sea, in which a Japanese attack on Port Moresby in New Guinea, an important link in communications between the United States and Australia, was turned back In this engagement, the Japanese lost fifteen of their capital ships and limped home with twenty damaged. (See map, p. 709. J The second event even more important was the naval Battle of Midway Island, June 3- 6. A large part of the Japanese navy, more than two hundred ships, was sent toward Midway Island and the western Aleutians. The capture of Midway by Japan would make Pearl Harbor unusable. But the Americans, having broken the Japanese code and knowing the enemy's plans, mounted a brilliant attack under Admiral Spruance and Admiral Fletcher. The Japanese lost four of their aircraft carriers and many of their other ships, and they retreated from the region of battle in disorder. After this defeat the Japanese never enjoyed enough naval air strength to take a long- range offensive. The balance of striking power had shifted. 1 Summaiize the extent of Axis activity by 1942.(See map, page 616.) Identify the advantages of the Allies. What considerations led to the decision to concentrate on the European theater? 4 Identify the events in the Pacific which checked the tide of Japanese aggression. 5 If you were predicting the outcome of the War in 1942, what would you conclude The attack on Pearl Harbor put an end to isolationism, and almost all Americans set to work to support the war. The intolerance and the attacks on civil liberties which had taken place during World War I (see p. 574) were not, by and large, repeated. German-Americans and Italian-Americans were not harassed. A tragic exception was the treatment of over one hundred thousand Japanese-Americans who were ruthlessly expelled from their homes along the Pacific Coast and incarcerated in relocation centers in the interior—an act that few could justify and many profoundly regretted. Later the federal government paid more than $25 million to Japanese-American evacuees for property losses, but this could not compensate for the injustice and humiliation they had experienced. This repression did not prevent many Nisei units (Americans of Japanese descent) from fighting heroically in the armed forces. American mobilization for production was greatly superior to that of World War I. At the time of Pearl Harbor there was already an American army of 1.6 million men. How does a nation's birth rate relate to its level of economic development? How does a change in birth rate affect social institutions like schools and families? per 1000 population Japan 28 United States 20 Unit ad Kingdom 18 Sweden 10 1"38 1948 1988 1968 The influx of Spanish-speaking peoples into the continental United States increased through the postwar period. Why are Mexicans referred to as immigrants and Puerto Ricans as migrants on the chart? Try to explain the decline in Puerto Rican migration between 1953 and 1954. Many Mexicans who come into the United States find jobs as migrant workers in the Southwest. Above, labor organizer Cesar Chavez began migrant work at age ten. What is the significance of the poster? After World War II American tourists and businessmen traveled all over the world. How do you account for the rapid increase in the number of Americans visiting Hong Kong? Why would travel abroad by a nation's citizens indicate that the nation is a world power? in thousands 100 ... Statistics not available 1947 435.000 1950 675.000 1955 1,075.000 1 What contributions have Puerto Rican migrants and Mexican immigrants made to United States culture? What difficulties have they had to overcome? 2 Tocqueville said in the 1800s that "the American could not stay still." Is American tourism prompted by the same impulse that made the frontiersman move westward? Explain. Puerto Rican teen-agers in Brooklyn, New York. Why do you suppose so many Puerto Rican migrants go to New York? Compare their future with that of the Mexican boys. 