HENRY F. GRAFFProfessor of History / Columbia University{ TheFREE and theBRAVEJTHE STORYOF THE AMERICAN PEOPLETEACHERS COLLEGE LIBRARYCOLUMBIA UNIVERSITYJUN 15 1982CurrE178.1G8421972First EditionCopyright 1967 by Rand McNally & CompanySecond EditionCopyright 1972 by Rand McNally & CompanyAll rights reservedMade in the United States of AmericaThis publication, or parts thereof, may not be reproducedin any form by photographic, electrostatic, mechanical,or any other method, for any use, including informationstorage and retrieval, without written permissionfrom the publisher.Cover design / Chris ArvetisBook design / Chris Arvetis and Vito De PintoTHE CONTENTSPART ONEFACING THE AMERICAS1Chapter 1A NEW WORLD TO MASTER42UNDER THE SPANISH FLAG243THE FRENCH EXPERIMENT44PART TWONEWCOMERS ON THE SEABOARD614FOOTHOLDS ON THE SHORE645A SECOND WAVE OF SETTLEMENTS866FILLING IN THE COASTLINE 104PART THREETHE STRUGGLE FOR LIBERTY 1257THE SHAPE OF COLONIAL WAYS OF LIFE 1288THE EXPULSION OF THE FRENCH 1489BICKERING WITH THE MOTHER COUNTRY 17010FORGING THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION 190PART FOURSHAPING A NATION 21711FASHIONING A NEW GOVERNMENT 22012FIRST YEARS UNDER PRESIDENTS 24613JEFFERSON AND HIS FRIENDS AT THE HELM 27014GROWING PAINS OF THE YOUNG REPUBLIC 292PART FIVESECTIONAL SQUABBLING 319Chapter 15THE INDELIBLE STAMP OF JACKSON 32216THE FACTORY HAND AND THE SLAVE 34417THE PUSH TO THE PACIFIC 36618THE RISE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN 388PART SIXBROTHERS IN CONFLICT 41319THE COUNTRY IN FLAMES 41620UNITING THE STATES AGAIN 448PART SEVENTHE TESTING OF DEMOCRACY 46921COAST-TO-COAST CHANGES 47222PLOWMEN AND WORKINGMEN 49423NEW NEEDS AND OLD POLITICS 51424DRUMBEATS AT HOME AND ABROAD 53425A NEW DAY OF REFORM 556PART EIGHTCERTAINTY AND UNCERTAINTY 57926WAGING WAR "OVER THERE" 58227A TIME OF FASTER LIVING 60228THE PROMISE OF A NEW DEAL 62429DEADLY THREATS FROM ABROAD 64630THE MAKING OF A NEW SOCIETY 672AppendixTHE DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE 704THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATESAND WHAT IT MEANS TODAY 707TABLES 730ILLUSTRATION ACKNOWLEDGMENTS734INDEX 735SHOWDOWN IN THE OHIO VALLEY 153THE FRENCH AND INDIAN WAR 157NORTH AMERICA, 1763 158SOURCES OF WEALTH IN THE COLONIES 164PROCLAMATION OF 1763 167THE BATTLES OF CONCORD AND LEXINGTON 187OPENING CAMPAIGNS OFAMERICAN REVOLUTION, 1775-1776 195CAMPAIGNS OF LATE 1776 AND 1777 201THE WAR IN THE WEST, 1778-1779 208CAMPAIGNS IN EAST AND SOUTH,1778 TO EARLY 1781 210THE END OF THE WAR, 1781 211THE UNITED STATES, 1783 213PART FOURSHAPING A NATIONWESTERN LAND CLAIMS 226WESTERN SETTLEMENT, 1769-1796 228PROVISIONS FOR SETTLINGNORTHWEST TERRITORY 231LOUISIANA PURCHASE ANDEXPLORATION OF FAR WEST 278THE BARBARY POWERS 283THE WAR OF 1812 294CUMBERLAND ROAD AND CANALS, 1830 306THE UNITED STATES, 1821 312PART FIVESECTIONAL SQUABBLINGGROWTH OF UNITED STATESPOPULATION, 1790-1840336THE UNITED STATES, 1840 338COTTON PRODUCTION IN THEUNITED STATES, 1790-1840 353RAILROADS IN 1850 362THE WEST IN 1845 370THE MORMON MIGRATION 375THE MEXICAN WAR, 1846-1848 381THE UNITED STATES, 1853 382KANSAS AND NEBRASKA TERRITORIES, 1854 398PART SIXBROTHERS IN CONFLICTTHE UNITED STATES, APRIL, 1861 421MAIN RAILROADS, 1860 426THE CIVIL WAR IN THE WEST, 1861-1862 431THE CIVIL WAR IN THE EAST, 1861-1862 432THE CIVIL WAR, 1863-1865438PART SEVENTHE TESTING OF DEMOCRACYSTEEL PRODUCTION, 1867-1970 475OIL PRODUCTION, 1860-1970 477THE TRANSCONTINENTAL RAILROADS 482THE WESTERN MINES 486THE CATTLE KINGDOM 490WESTERN INDIAN RESERVATIONS, 1875 500IMMIGRATION TO THE UNITED STATES, 1830-1970 520THE UNITED STATES 542-543THE HAWAIIAN ISLANDS 545THE FIGHTING IN THE PHILIPPINES 548THE FIGHTING IN CUBA 550UNITED STATES POSSESSIONS, 1899 553THE PANAMA CANAL AND THE CARIBBEAN 568PART EIGHTCERTAINTY AND UNCERTAINTYTHE FIRST WORLD WAR IN 1918 594DAMS BUILT IN THE 1930's 639EXPANSION OF GERMANY AND ITALY, 1935-1940 651THE SECOND WORLD WAR IN EUROPEAND NORTH AFRICA, 1941-1945 658THE SECOND WORLD WAR IN THE PACIFIC 662DIFFICULTIES IN EASTERN ASIA 680AIR AND WATER POLLUTIONIN THE UNITED STATES 699WANDERERS ARRIVEFROM THE EASTWe do not know who the first Americanentering America, they had developed thewas, but we are fairly certain that his an-spear, their only weapon against thecestors lived in the Old World. We also be-hazards they had to face.lieve that by the time he arrived in theThe first model of the spear must haveNew World, he was probably physicallybeen a crudely fashioned piece of jaggedand mentally much as we know him to-flint, or rock. Held in the palm of the hand,day. Only recently have we begun to under-it was like a human claw, useful in hack-stand how he may have reached here anding an animal to death.where he came from.Later-who knows how much later, per-haps thousands of years-the spear wasCROSSING THE BRIDGEimproved. The flint was attached to a shaftThe first immigrants began to slip fromof wood so that the weapon could be hurlednortheastern Asia into what we call Alaskaat an animal from a distance, with greaterthousands of years ago. These earliestforce and safety.Americans crossed the area where BeringStill later the new spear was attached toStrait lies today. Moving in small groups,another stick of wood, about 2 feet long.they came at various times during theThis spear-thrower made it possible for theperiod known as the Ice Age, which beganearly hunters to propel the weapon a muchbetween one and two million years ago.greater distance and with even greaterFor thousands of years, great sheets offorce.ice covered large areas of the earth's sur-Today many Americans look every yearface. As the ice sheets developed, theyfor new and improved models of cars, re-locked up on the land huge amounts offrigerators, television sets, and many otherwater. The result was that oceans at timesconveniences. The first Americans, on thewere probably as much as 400 feet lowerother hand, possibly waited a thousandthan they are today.years or more for the bettering of theDuring such times a broad expanse ofsingle instrument on which their very livesland between 200 and 1300 miles widedepended.stretched out where Bering Strait is now.Technological change. When people ap-Therefore, it was possible for the earliestply scientific principles-in the case of theimmigrants to wander from Asia to Amer-Ice Age people, simply shrewd observa-ica across a bridge of land that today istions- the making of useful tools andunder water.instruments, they are practicing technol-

Armed with a spear. Nimble and strong,ogy. We call changes in tools and instru-the first Americans were wanderingments technological change.hunters who had no fixed dwelling placesThe rate of technological change is onebut followed animal trails wherever theyimportant measure of human progress. To-led. Always on the move, these early peo-day we are aware of the ever-increasingple chased such Ice Age game as bison,speed at which such changes occur. Thecamels, mammoths, mastodons, antelope,invention of one new tool or instrumentcoyotes, giant ground sloths, and primitivemay produce many other changes veryhorses.quickly. But in the Ice Age, human prog-The men and women of those days livedress was so slow that changes took placeshort lives full of natural dangers. Beforeonly over thousands of years.6F. W. Fairholt, Its History and Associations,' London, 1859 (Arents Collections, New York Publie Library)Planters oversee the packing of tobacco leaves for shipment to Europe,perhaps on the vessels anchored along the shore in the far background.as give services to the London Company.uncomfortable ships, fearing all the whileSoon the terms were made even moredrowning on the way. And they alwaysgenerous. In 1618 it was decided thatknew that they might starve after arrivingevery man who brought himself and hisor, worst of all, that men in the Newfamily to America would receive 50 acresWorld might not like them.for each person (including servants).In royal hands. Despite much personalImmigrants from Africa. The followingsacrifice in America, the Virginia Com-year a passing Dutch man-of-war from thepany itself never made money. The earlyAfrican coast sold twenty Negroes to thetrials and discouragements of the James-Virginians. The blacks and their childrentown settlement were followed by poorwere able to obtain land and full freedommanagement and disputes among thewhen they had "worked off" their cost. Yet,stockholders. Finally, in 1624 the Englishas we shall see, with these arrivals slaveryking canceled the Virginia Company'swas in the making in America.charter, and Virginia became a royal colo-Shipment of wives. Just about the sameny-one governed by the king.time that the Negroes landed, women be-The House of Burgesses. A permanentgan to come to Virginia in numbers.contribution of the Virginia Company wasNinety arrived in one shipment-" "youngthe House of Burgesses-the earliest rep-women to make wiveshandsome andresentative assembly to meet in America.honestly educated maids.'Consisting of twenty-two men (two fromThe condition of the women was not aseach of the eleven settlements that hadromantic as it has sometimes been madebeen made), it first came together in 1619out in novels to be. They were simply tak-to write laws for Virginia. Its membersing a chance that their life in Americawere elected by the men of Virginia, all ofwould be an improvement over their life inwhom could vote. Its meeting place wasEngland. They had to travel on crowded,the little church at Jamestown.75

(Left) Abigall Adams Historical Society: (Right) Charles William Janson, The Stranger ofAmerica, 1807 (United States National Park Service)Left: Abigail Smith Adams, the first First Lady who livedin Washington. Mrs. Adams had upheld her husband'sRevolutionary activities and was his constant helpmate.Right: The President's house as it looked when the Adamses moved in.e"Hail, Columbia!" When the news ofington out of retirement and make himSthe insult to the Americans reached thethe military leader.nUnited States, the public response was asBut Adams decided that he did not want1-strong as Pinckney's. A popular slogan ofto take advantage of war fever in theythe time was "Millions for defense but notUnited States to take the country into ad.one cent for tribute." In the outburst ofconflict. He considered such a war as un-ispatriotism that followed, the first of thenecessary as it would be costly. He wantedagreat American patriotic songs was born:to be reelected President in 1800, but not"Hail, Columbia!"by supporting friends in his own partyr-The song was the work of Joseph Hop-who might take advantage of war abroadmkinson, who tried, he wrote, to arouse "Anto destroy liberties at home.veAmerican spirit." Its best-known lines are:Attack on civil liberties. The liberties, orthfreedoms, that were threatened were civilHail! Columbia, happy land!n-liberties-especially, freedom of the pressHail! ye heroes, heaven-born band,reand freedom of speech (see page 242). InWho fought and bled in freedom'sed1798 the Federalists in Congress broughtcausensabout the passage of the Naturalizationir-Hopkinson could see how blindly anti-Act of 1798. This law aimed to slow downu-French the Federalists had become andthe granting of citizenship to foreigners.how anti-British the Republicans were. AsMany of the newcomers tended to becomeofbe wrote not long afterward, he wantedfollowers of Jefferson. The new lawinhis song to stir both groups, "for both werestretched the period of naturalization-inchAmerican."which foreigners became citizens-from 5es-to 14 years.reWAR FEVERAnother law not in keeping with theX"A war against France would have beenspirit of the Constitution was known as theofpopular with a great many Americans-Alien Act, passed in 1798 also. In this lawngespecially the Federalists. Immediately, aCongress gave the President authority un-encampaign to prepare for war began. It washeard of. He could order to leave the coun-enled by Hamilton, even though he was outtry any alien-foreigner-who, in hisleyof the government. Some people thoughtopinion, was "dangerous to the peace ande!"it would be a good idea to bring Wash-safety of the United States."265goods and markets were brought together.Famine in Ireland. The first was theWithout railroads factories could not have"Great Hunger" in Ireland in 1845, causedcontinued to grow in number and prosper.by the failure of the Irish potato crop.When in the spring of 1847 disease fol-NEWCOMERS AT THE "GOLDEN DOOR"lowed the famine, the Irish began a head-A second significant development of thelong flight to America. An official report1840's was the increase in immigration.from Ireland said, "All with means areAs factories multiplied, more and moreemigrating, only the utterly destitute arepeople, especially Europeans, were attract-left behind.In 1847 over 105,000 Irished to the North. Two shattering events onmen and women came to these shores. Inthe other side of the Atlantic added sub-1848 the number was even greater.stantially to the total number of immi-Settlers in the city. Although the Irishgrants coming to America.immigrants were almost always farmers,In what section of the country were most of the railroads located in 1850?What cities were railroad terminals? How does the map help explain why New York Citydoubled its population between 1840 and 18501LAKESUPERIORL. ONTARION.Y.C.BuffaloSchenectadyWalthamBosionAlbanyERIEtheHartforgNew HavenDetroit)ChicagoLARESanduskyNew YorkPENNR.RPittsburghPhiladelphiaWheelingB &0SpringfieldBaltimoreWashington,CincinnatiNewHarmonyRichmondPortsmouthMemphisChattanoogaWilmingtonAtlantaHamburgCharlestonVicksburgSavannah),Railroads in 1850New Orleans:100-Museum of the City of New YorkA large group of Irish immigrants arrive with all their possessionsin New York Harbor in 1847. Who was on hand to greet them? What werethe newcomers' immediate requirements? What immense advantagedid they have over most other immigrants of that time?they became city dwellers in the Unitedin the bigger cities of the East but also onStates. Usually they stayed in the Ameri-farms throughout the midwestern states.can ports where they landed-Boston, NewThey brought with them a driving ambi-York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and others.tion for a better way of living and a loveVery few had the money to go farther andof freedom.purchase farmland.The burden of adjustment. Most immi-The Irish newcomers were determinedgrants in the cities wanted to acquirethat although they lived in slums andmoney for new homes and churches and toworked with picks and shovels (theysend for their relatives. In trying to reachhelped to build the first railroads), theirsuch goals, many were forced to live inchildren would "have it better." In a fewslums or seek charity. Unable to get along,years the Irish were strengthening thesome of the newcomers broke down andNorth by working in the factories and help-turned to crime and vice.ing to govern and police the great cities.Outraged, many Americans then dis-German refugees. A second event in Eu-criminated against the newcomers, main-tope pushed to America a large numbertaining that they were "undesirable." Theof German immigrants, also. This wasfierce opposition to Catholics in the 1840'sthe failure in their homeland of an upris-was one way in which people showed howing in 1848 against their king, which hadthey felt about immigrants, especiallyaimed to establish the beginnings of demo-about the refugees from Ireland.

cratic government. The "forty-eighters," asthe immigrants were often called, includedSHARPENED SECTIONAL DIFFERENCESprofessional men as well as farmers.The railroads and the immigration,The German newcomers, having morethen, were having a powerful impact onmoney than the Irishmen, settled not onlythe North. Combined with the reform363TRANSCONTINENTALS LINKTHE NATIONThe railroad, as we know, had alreadyPutting down the rails. The heroes ofplayed an important role in helping unitebuilding the railroads included the thou-the American people. This role becamesands of workingmen. Some were farmeven bigger in the years after the Civil Warboys who had recently arrived from Irelandas the country saw a large-scale growth of(see page 363). Others were farm boysrail transportation.who had been brought from China.A stirring new chapter in the story ofThe Chinese, mostly from the south ofthe railroad was the building of the firstChina in the vicinity of Canton, came asranscontinental-thati is, the first railroadindentured servants (see page 138). Theystretching across a continent.were indebted to Chinese agents who hadadvanced them the money for their pas-"A WORK OF GIANTS"sage to the States. Originally the gold rushAn interest in making real the dream ofhad attracted many of these youths to Cali-"linking the oceans" had developed afterfornia. Because there were hard times inthe discovery of gold in California in 1848.their homeland, they looked forward toCongress first acted to reach this goal inbeing able to support their families by1862, when it established the Unionsending them money from overseas andPacific Railroad Company. The U.P., as itthen to rejoining them later.was called, was given the right to build aIn order to build a transcontinental, tworoad from Omaha, a town in the territory ofrail-laying gangs-one on each side of theNebraska, to the eastern boundary of Cali-fornia. Meanwhile, a company named theTell how a transcontinental-railroad trackCentral Pacific (the C.P.) was instructedwas laid on the bare, treeless Great Plains.to build a line eastward from Sacramento,Great Northern RailwayCalifornia, to meet the Union Pacific.Federal money. To make the undertakingsuccessful-and to spur it on-Congressprovided subsidies of money to the railroadcompanies. They were figured in this way:$16,000 a mile in the level country east ofthe Rockies-$48,000 a mile in the ruggedcountry of the mountains themselves-and $32,000 a mile between the mountainranges. The federal government also gavethe companies generous tracts of landalong the paths of the lines.The feeling then was that without feder-aid, private businessmen would not beable to undertake the mammoth task. Wil-liam T. Sherman, the Civil War general,said that the building of a transcontinentalTailroad would be "a work of giants." Headded, "Uncle Sam is the only giant I knowwho can grapple the subject."Nine years after the decision of 1877,tury many other kinds of regulatory com-however, the Supreme Court seemed tomissions like the ICC would be set up.change its mind-a least about the rail-The farmers, therefore, had had a handroads. It decided that a state could not reg-in bringing about an important change inulate a railroad line that ran in moreAmerican life. They had led the federalthan one state, because such a railroadgovernment to accept responsibility forwas engaged in interstate commerce. Un-maintaining the just treatment of citizensder the provisions of the Constitution, onlyby private enterprise.Congress can regulate interstate com-merce. Since all important railroads ran inmore than one state, the decision meant an1. Tell what the Homestead Act provided.end to railroad regulation by the states.2. Name three disappointments that wereThe ICC. Congress now took steps. Inconnected with it. 3. Identify two problems1887 it created the Interstate Commercethat farmers on the Great Plains had and tellCommission, a body of five men with thehow they were solved. 4. What farm im-power to regulate railroad rates. For a longplement was most important for the farmers?time the ICC was not permitted to regulateWhy? 5. Describe the Oklahoma run. 6.railroads fully. Still the establishment ofName some bad practices which the Grangerthe commission proved to be a landmarkLaws tried to correct. 7. State the main pur-in American history. In the twentieth cen-pose of the ICC.NEW UNIONS STRUGGLETO HELP WORKING PEOPLELaboring men had problems, too. They,to them. Moreover, skilled Americans hadalso, were caught up in changes to whichthe feeling that as "master craftsmen" theythey had to adjust. From the start, howev-had earned privileges they did not need toer, they were in a different position fromshare easily with anybody, particularlythat of the farmers. Farmers long had hadnewcomers.reputation for being nature's noblemen.Newly arrived immigrants were at a dis-1Workingmen were scorned, chiefly be-advantage as workers. Often they had tocause they lived in cities, depending closelyagree to conditions of employment that1on others and owning no land.were terrible. The men very frequentlyhoped to send money back to the old:BACKGROUND CONDITIONScountry to bring other members of theirSThe opportunity to organize did notfamilies here. Consequently, some im-come easily to unskilled factory workers.migrants seemed more interested in merelyeThey were increasingly ignored by thehaving jobs than in the conditions of work.I-killed workers, who looked down uponPossibly these circumstances slowed downdnem.the growth of labor unions in the 1850's.s,The unskilled immigrant. One reasonLocal strikes. But some importantdthat the unskilled from the 1840's onstrikes took place, too. For instance, thedwere usually immigrants, often only re-shoemakers in Massachusetts called one injently arrived. Their foreign ways, gener-order to win higher wages. Among thenilly including a foreign language or ac-twenty thousand strikers were many wom-ent, made many Americans feel superioren. The fierceness of this strike and others505

National Baseball Hall of Fame andThe beginning of Major League baseball: the first championship game,between the New Yorks and the Knickerbockers at Hoboken, New Jersey,in 1846 (see page 386). How does the scene differ from a World Series game today?Wider personal freedom. Seventh, theappeal, but it created a new kind of publiccities strengthened the spirit of personalfreedom. Young people in cities could leavehero-the triumphant athlete. It made pos-sible a quick rise to fame and riches forhome more easily than those on farms inchildren of poor parents.order to "try their luck." In the city theyfound a greater variety of possible jobs andA REFUGE FOR NEWCOMERSmarriage partners.A chief source of strength for the citiesSpectator sports. Finally, the cities pro-before 1900 was the immigration from Eu-vided excitement to fill leisure time. Onerope. Between 1820 and 1930 more thanreason was the rise of spectator sports-sixty-two million Europeans left theirthat is, athletic contests in which fans byhomes and went to other continents. Aboutthe thousands can watch the participants.thirty-two million came to the UnitedIn 1869 the first professional baseballStates, bringing various languages, ways ofteam was formed-the Cincinnati Reddoing things, and outlooks with them.Stockings. Seven years later the NationalProbably many of the brightest and mostLeague was organized, and the Americanambitious Europeans were among thoseLeague was begun in 1900. In time base-who left their native lands.ball became the national pastime.The "old immigration." The newcomersIn 1882 John L. Sullivan, "the Bostonwho came to America before the Civil Warstrong boy," became the first modernare today called the old immigration. Theyheavyweight champion. Professional box-came here in the largest numbers in theing never approached baseball in popular1850's, chiefly from northern and western518Europe-England, France, the Low Coun-Roman Catholic or Jewish. Some peopletries, Germany, and Scandinavia. In thedistrusted them because their ways weresame period, many immigrants arrivedunlike those of many Americans.from Ireland (see page 363).Many of the Russian immigrants wereWhy they came. People came to theJews. When they sought work or housing,United States for many different reasons.they encountered signs saying "GentilesSome wanted political freedom, and othersonly." Jews were not the only group to findsought new opportunities to make a living.some Americans prejudiced against them.Samuel Gompers, who arrived here inItalians and Poles were among others who1863, once wrote that as a child he hadalso felt the effects of discrimination.been taught a song entitled "To the West."Help from city machines. The only peo-He said it expressed the feeling of Englishple who seemed interested in helping theworkers. Andrew Carnegie later told Gom-immigrants were the bosses of city politi-pers that the song had inspired his fathercal organizations-or machines as they areto come to America. The words go:sometimes called. These machines wereTo the west, to the west, tousually corrupt, but they provided thethe land of the freenewcomers with many badly needed ser-Where mighty Missouri rollsvices. A local machine might find jobs fordown to the sea;its faithful supporters, take care of hospitalWhere a man is a man ifbills, or arrange for legal help. To veryhe's willing to toil,poor families it might donate turkeys atAnd the humblest may gatherThanksgiving and supplies of coal duringthe fruits of the soil.the winter.Where children are blessingsSometimes local politicians sponsoredand he who hath mostboat rides or "June walks" (outings in theHas aid for his fortunespark). These offered entertainment andand riches to boast.refreshments for young and old alike.Where the young may exultand the aged may rest,Cartoons like this one by Thomas NastAway, far away, to thehelped destroy Boss William Marcy Tweedland of the west.Albert Bigelow Paine, "Thomas Nast: His and His Pietures,"Harper Brothers. 1904The "new immigration." The opportuni-ties for personal freedom, better jobs, andbetter homes continued to attract newcom--ers to the United States after the Civil War-and still do. But two changes in immi-gration occurred after 1880. First, moreimmigrants than ever came to America(see the graph on page 520). Second, theycame from countries of eastern and south-ern Europe instead of northern and west-ern Europe.The customs and traditions of the newimmigrants were different from those ofearlier arrivals, who for the most part hadbeen Protestants. In contrast to the previ-ous arrivals, the newcomers were largelyUNDER THE THUMB519

The best-known machine was Tweed'sTammany Hall, in New York City (seeCOMFORTS AND DISCOMFORTSpage 459). Like other such organizations,Mingled together in every urban com-it held power by winning votes through themunity were the exciting advantages offavors it could distribute.living close to large numbers of other peo-Feelings about the old country. Under-ple-and all the terrible disadvantages.standably many immigrants longed for theEach city dweller viewed the advantageseasy acceptance they had known "backand disadvantages differently.home." This feeling kept alive a certainThe electric trolleys. Life in the modern-affection for the old country-a fact thattype city became more comfortable as newAmerican politicians drew on in seekinguses for electricity were discovered. One ofsupport for various foreign policies.the most important of these was the fur-Of course, politicians sometimes ap-nishing of power for trolley cars. After thepealed to immigrants by attacking certaintrolley first appeared in 1887, in Rich-European countries. Irishmen were de-mond, Virginia, a network of electric wireslighted to hear anti-British talk, since theywere soon hanging over the streets of everyblamed Britain for their troubles. And aftermajor city.suffering years of persecution in Russia,Before the electric trolley car was devel-Jewish voters welcomed anti-Russian opin-oped, the usual vehicle for transportingions. Politicians were quick to recognize,people had been the horse-drawn car-lithowever, that immigrants were far moreby oil at night and dirty, smelly, and some-interested in improving their lot in thewhat uncertain. Trolleys were such an im-United States than in hearing about theirprovement that they helped make city lifeformer countries.attractive to millions. They carried peopleLeft: The completed Statue of Liberty, dedicated in 1886(see page 448), thrilled immigrants arriving in New York Harbor.Below: Explain the great variations in the number of new arrivals.9Immigration to8the United States1830-197076543210Library of CongressThe situations of families working in "flats"like this in New York tenements helped arousereformers. Why did "homework," like thecigar-making above, come under sharp attack?The state court decided that the law wasClearly the workingman required someunconstitutional. The court held that evenkind of protection. In bargaining over thea law for protecting health must not inter-conditions of his work, he did not have thefere with the personal liberty of people topower of his employer-who could firework when and where they please.him on the spot and replace him overnight.New immigrants or other unskilledThe courts would have to be convincedworkingmen and -women actually couldtheir old opinions were no longer right.not make such a choice. If they did notWomen in laundries. A changed ideawork as their employer said they must,appeared in a case in Oregon in 1908. Thethey did not work at all.state legislature had passed a law makingThe overworked bakers. The Supremeit illegal for a woman to work more thanCourt of the United States also took theten hours a day in a laundry. The Oregonposition that the New York court had. In acourt studied the New York decision and1905 case that is now famous, it declaredsaid it did not apply to the Oregon law. Itunconstitutional a law that said bakersstated it was necessary to offer women spe-may not work more than sixty hours acial protection "in order to preserve theweek. The Court said that the law inter-strength and vigor of the race."fered with a man's right to make a con-Louis D. Brandeis. The lawyer defendingtract. In this instance it interfered with hisOregon's law was Louis D. Brandeis, awillingness to agree to work as long as hebrilliant attorney from Boston. Brandeiseach week.had long believed that government must563

FEAR DRAWS INTOLERANCEINTO THE OPENBeneath the playfulness of the 1920's,New laws. The laws passed in the 1920'sthere were some distressing signs, too. Oneaccomplished what the Congressman hadof these was intolerance toward minoritieswanted. Before the decade was over, immi--groups of people whose race, religion, orgration to America had been severely cutnational background differs from that ofdown. In defending this legislation, thethe majority of Americans.president of the United States said in 1923,"America must be kept American." By thisIMMIGRATION RESTRICTIONhe seemed to mean that immigrants wouldFor many years there had been criticismno longer be welcomed.of unrestricted immigration into the UnitedStates. Labor unions especially had wantedTHE KU KLUX KLANto cut down on this flow of people.About the same time, a powerful andThe charges. One charge frequentlydangerous effort arose to keep control ofheard about immigration was that war-tornthe country in the hands of "native, white,Europe was about to dump millions ofand Protestant" people. A leader in the ef-people onto American shores. A secondfort, often violent, was the Ku Klux Klan-charge was that many recent arrivals werea new organization formed in 1915, usingdisloyal people who "ought to go backthe name and methods of the old post-Civilwhere they came from."War Klan. The Klan was against blacks,Nevertheless, the main reason for theCatholics, and Jews.feeling against immigrants was, sadly,The targets. The black man was espe-intolerance. Those coming to this countrycially singled out for persecution by thecontinued to be largely from southern andKlan. He was, according to that organiza-eastern Europe. The time had come, saidtion, "simply racially incapable of under-a Minnesota Congressman in 1920, to passstanding, sharing, or contributing to Amer-"a genuine 100 percent American immi-icanism.' This poison of intolerance spreadgration law." What he meant was a lawas blacks moved from the rural South to alllimiting the number of new arrivals andparts of the United States.favoring immigrants from the British IslesJews, Catholics, and foreigners also suf-and northern Europe.fered the effects of discrimination. SomeImmigrants passing throughthe receiving stationat Ellis Island, wheremost newcomers arrived.How did they probablyfeel as they waitedto begin a lifein America?UPIJewish and Catholic storekeepers were boy-cotted and workers of those faiths fired.Sometimes this was the direct result ofKlan influence; at other times the organiza-tion itself seemed only to reflect the feel-ings of all too many Americans.The use of violence. In its work, the KuKlux Klan killed, mutilated, flogged, tarredand feathered, and even branded its vic-tims. Setting itself up as a judge of "Amer-icanism," the Klan-through its leader-explained the word. Americanism, he said,is "a thing of the spirit land] few alienscan understand that spirit."The nation as a victim. By the mid-1920'sthe Klan's membership was over four mil-lion. Its political power was felt in the262945North and South alike-for example, Ore-gon and Indiana were dominated at onetime by the Klan. The nation that so re-cently preached the need to make the worldsafe for democracy was a victim of this un-democratic "invisible government."Underwood A UnderwoodTHE "RED SCARE"One of the thousandsOne reason that intolerance showed it-of Ku Klux Klansmen who paradedself in America was a revolution in Russia,in a celebration of the Fourth of Julyat Long Branch, New Jersey, in 1924.resulting in the establishment of Commu-nist ("Red") rule. Most Americans did notPresident Wilson called this strike a crimeknow the details of events there, whereagainst civilization.the Bolsheviks had overthrown the gov-Another development contributing toernment, killed the czar and his family,the "Red scare" was an outbreak of violenceand taken power. Because the Communistsby anarchists in the United States. (Theyhad always maintained their revolutionbelieved that all government is bad andwould one day be worldwide, people heremust be destroyed.) Several places weresaw themselves threatened by the eventsbombed, including the home of the Attor-on the other side of the world.ney-General of the United States. BombsStrikes and bombs. One effect of the Rus-were also sent through the mails to somesian Revolution was a widespread "Redleading Americans-among them John D.scare" in which many Americans thoughtRockefeller, the oil king.they saw Communists at every turn. TheirActions against foreigners. The "Redfear increased when a general strike inscare" became so widespread between 1919Seattle-that is, a work stoppage by everyand 1920 that the Attorney-Generalunion-tied up the city. It grew greaterrounded up and arrested thousands ofwhen most of the police of Boston went onforeigners. Some of them were sent outstrike in 1919, leaving the city's streetsof the country for reasons that would bewithout protection except from volunteers.very difficult to defend.617

CHAPTER 28THE PROMISE OF A NEW DEALWhat happens to a family today whose incomehas been cut off? What are the responsibilities ofthe public and its leaders to such a family?NRAWhat determines how a family spends its in-come? To what extent are the choices of cityMEMBERdwellers different from those of rural people?How much freedom does an individual have todispose of his income as he wishes? What de-U.S.mands on his income does the community havea right to make?WE DO OUR PARTIn the 1920's the city more and more wasinfluencing American life as a whole, andthe problems of its people were beginningto come to the surface. Racial and religiousdiscrimination were grave handicaps forgreat numbers of Americans. At the sametime low-paying jobs and unsatisfactoryhousing kept millions from feeling theyshared in the country's much-advertisedgeneral prosperity. No national figure, how-ever, had yet tried to deal with these in-justices-0) had been forced to.625THE NATION FALLSINTO THE GREAT DEPRESSIONBefore the 1920's were over, the majorityAl Smith, of New York. The Democratsof Americans were city people. In 1910nominated Alfred E. Smith, the governorover 54 percent of all Americans had livedof New York. He was only the second presi-in towns of 2500 or less, but in 1930 thedential candidate of a major party to comefigure was only 44 percent. Between 1920from a large city (see page 557).and 1930 the population of urban AmericaBorn on New York City's lower East Side,increased by 27 percent, while that of ruralSmith had had a childhood different fromAmerica grew by only 4 percent.the childhoods of politicians born on farmsand in small towns. Instead of climbingA REVEALING ELECTIONtrees and feeling free, Smith had beenThe presidential election in 1928 seemedraised in a crowded tenement. Thus heto show how people felt about the increas-came to understand the feelings of sluming importance of cities. Both the Republi-dwellers. Instead of fishing along the bankscans and the Democrats chose good candi-of a country stream, he had learned todates, but the differences between theirswim in the city's East River, already beingbackgrounds had a startling effect on thepolluted by factory and human wastes.election's outcome.These experiences as a boy helped him seeearly some of the problems of an industrialAl Smith jauntily waves his derby in a campaignnation.appearance in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1928.As Smith, a member of the RomanWide WorldCatholic Church, advanced in his publiccareer, he joined Tammany Hall, New YorkCity's powerful political machine. He alsobecame a pioneer in calling for social im-provements by government. And very earlyhe opposed prohibition.Al Smith, who wore a brown derby andsmoked cigars, seemed to millions of Amer-icans to be a perfect representative of thecity. Because many people usually thoughtof cities as dens of sin and corruption,Smith had a heavy burden to bear duringthe campaign.Herbert Hoover, from Iowa. The Republi-cans nominated Herbert C. Hoover, orig-inally of Iowa, who had been the Secretaryof Commerce under Harding and Coolidge.He had been a farm boy, knowing both thehard work and the personal satisfaction of"doing chores." Born as poor as Smith, hehad nevertheless been able to obtain aneducation at Stanford University, in Cali-fornia. He was grown up before he everset foot east of the Mississippi.onethe process, minorities, including especiallyAbove all, "F. D. R." was the first Presi-Catholics, Jews, and blacks, could feeldent able to convince his countrymen thatfor the first time that their problems weredemocracy could both solve the nation'srecognized in the White House.problems and be a stirring faith to serve asIn a number of fields, Roosevelt was thea guide in a dangerous and threateningfirst chief executive to act. He named theworld. He once said, "We Americans of to-first woman Cabinet member and ap-day-all of us-we are characters in thepointed the first black to be a federal courtliving book of democracy." Roosevelt en-judge-William Henry Hastie, of Knox-couraged the American people to believeville, Tennessee. The President's supportthat the stories in that book could alwaysfor public housing was the beginning ofhave happy endings.later urban-renewal programs. He traveledwidely outside America. In establishinga Good Neighbor policy toward the people1. Name three reform laws of Roosevelt'sof Latin America, he announced that hefirst administration and tell what each ac-was against interfering in their affairs.complished. 2. How were working peopleA faith in democracy. Roosevelt, finally,encouraged in 1935? 3. Describe the CIO.never allowed his countrymen to forget4. What advantage and disadvantage didthat no matter how difficult the nation'sbusinessmen see to having to deal with oneproblems might be, they could be solved inlarge union in an industry? 5. Describedemocratic ways. Democracy was for himRoosevelt's plan for the Supreme Court.not just a word but the best guarantee that6. Name several changes that Rooseveltpeople will achieve a good life.brought to American life.THE WORKSHOPTHE SHAPERS OF OUR TIMEWORDS FOR KEEPINGDescribe the part each of the followingUse the following words to show yourhad in the effort to bring about "recoveryunderstanding of the suffering in the Greatand reform" during the 1930's.Depression.Alfred E. SmithSocial Security Actpolitical machinepolioTammany HallAlfred M. LandonpollutedplightHerbert C. HooverTwentiethstock marketboondoggleGreat Depression

Amendmentdirect reliefprocessedFranklin D.CIOintolerancecollectiveRooseveltJohn L. Lewisdroughtbargaining"Bonus Army"TVA"dust bowl"humanNew DealCCC"ride the rails"resourcesCordell HullWagner Actwork reliefHenry A. WallaceNRAFrances PerkinsAAAGRASPING THE ISSUESEleanor RooseveltWPAReview the exercises in the chapter andHarry HopkinsNYAthen answer these questions:644AMERICANS CONTRIBUTETO THE ALLIED VICTORYBy the time the war came in 1941, manydescent from their homes on the PacificAmericans had long before taken sides.coast to detention camps inland. AboutThey had been rooting and praying fortwo-thirds of the Japanese-Americans wereBritain and France as free democraciesUnited States citizens. These abused Amer-threatened with destruction. Moreover, theicans were the victims of a long history ofbrutalities of the Nazis toward the Jewsprejudice against people of Asian ancestry,offended deeply the conscience of the coun-as well as a wild fear of a rumored invasiontry. The kind of "rah-rah," therefore, thatto be aided by them.had stirred up Americans as they enteredprevious wars was notably lacking-andPROVIDING THE MANPOWERunnecessary.During the course of the war, over fifteenAn Office of War Information was cre-million Americans served in the armedated, but its task was to explain the war,forces, two-thirds of them in the army.not "sell" it. Hysteria over who was "loyal"Over 300,000 women enlisted.or "disloyal" did not arise-even thoughThe draft. The attack on Pearl Harborthere was deep resentment of expressionsbrought immediate changes in the draftor acts of disloyalty.law. By mid-December, 1941, new legis-There was sufficient hysteria, however,lation led to the registration of all men be-to produce a shameful violation of the Con-tween 18 and 64 years of age. Thosestitution. President Roosevelt authorizedbetween the ages of 20 and 44 were liablethe removal of 110,000 people of Japanesefor service. Although some men were ex-Standing at the feet of a GI guard, a Japanese-American toddlertagged like a piece of baggage waits to be taken to a detention camp.Library of Congress1,90°E.100°E.110°E.120°E.130°EMONGOLIA80°N 140°É,Difficulties inPeking38thEastern Asia*Seoul100200300400 milesPaths oftheaggressionShanghalCHINA4SEASIKKIMCHINATropic ofINDIA(PAR.:DaccaPACIFICACBURMANGRTHHONG KONGVIETNAMHanoiO CEANLAOSVientiane *RangoonQuezon CityTHAILANDPHILIPPINESBangkokSOUTHVIETNAM10°NCAMBODIACAMINAPhnom Penh*SaigónINDIANBRUNEIMALAYSIAKuala LumpurSINGAPOREADjakarta/NDONES10°5.Wide WorldLeft: Caught in the war, Koreans crawl over a shattered bridge at Pyongyang in late 1950.Right: Identify the areas that became new centers of aggression after the Second World War.States troops sent to Korea, was placed inThe entrance of the Chinese. The north-command of the UN forces as well.ward march of the United Nations forcesUN triumph. As soon as the UN forceswas suddenly halted at the end of Novem-could build up their strength, they pushedber by the appearance of Chinese Commu-northward. The North Korean army begannist forces in very large numbers. Theto break up, and the Korean War seemedAmerican troops underwent a fierce attackabout over. The United Nations then de-in bitter-cold weather. They retreated, suf-cided to send its forces forward into Northfering as few Americans have ever sufferedKorea. By the end of October, Pyongyangin battle. Weapons and food froze, and(pyung yäng), the capital of North Korea,there were terrible casualties resultinghad surrendered.from frostbite.680

A NEW PLAGUE OF PROBLEMSBESETS THE NATIONTruman left office with many problems un-The Chinese-Soviet split. Khrushchevsolved. It seemed safe to guess as the im-was undoubtedly influenced by the divi-mediate postwar era ended that no Presi-sion gradually opening between the Sovietdent would ever again leave a cleared deskUnion and Red China. The split widenedfor his successor.shortly after Khrushchev's visit to theUnited States. The Chinese expressed irri-"IKE" EISENHOWERtation that a Communist leader likeGeneral Eisenhower enjoyed a world-Khrushchev should be hobnobbing with thewide reputation such as no President-electAmerican President.has ever had. His gifts for persuadingThe Soviets continued to push for ad-people to work together were well-known.vantages in Berlin, Southwest Asia, andYet he found that international problemsAfrica. Still, the growing unfriendliness ofwere as trying for him as they had beenChina-their giant neighbor-cooled theirfor Truman.interest in new moves against the UnitedThe end of battle. Eisenhower had madeStates and other Western countries.a campaign pledge to try to end the war byTreaties for defense. The Secretary ofgoing to Korea. Before his inauguration,State, John Foster Dulles, worked tireless-he made good his word. Unable to get thely for collective security for the UnitedCommunists to take part in peace talks, theStates. Copying the idea of NATO, he ar-President hinted that Americans might useranged a series of defense agreements in-nuclear weapons. At last in July, 1953,volving the United States throughout thethe Korean War officially ended, withworld. The number of countries protectedagreement on a slightly different boundaryby American pledges mounted, but somebetween North and South Korea. The warhad cost the United States about 140,000"Ike" gives the wartime V signcasualties-including over 30,000 deathsas he greets crowds on one of his trips-and twenty-two billion dollars.during the 1952 presidential campaign.Wrestling with Khrushchev. Shortly afterWide WorldEisenhower took office, Joseph Stalin died.Nikita Khrushchev (kroosh chôf'), thenew Soviet dictator, condemned Stalin asa bloody-handed cutthroat. Many Ameri-cans felt encouraged enough to think thatthe moment had arrived for seeking friend-lier relations with the Soviets.In September, 1959, Khrushchev visitedthe United States. After touring the coun-try, he met with Eisenhower. But the timewas not ripe for a settlement of the coldwar. Early the next year an Americanplane was shot down over Soviet territory.Khrushchev used the episode as an excuseto end his seeming friendliness toward theUnited States.682Extending the vote. The most effectivecivil rights leaders recognized that no mat-ter how many marches and "sit-ins" theystaged, their best weapon in ending segre-gation was the ballot. Congress was grad-ually won over to passing civil rights lawsthat could help eliminate discriminationand guarantee equal rights and opportuni-ties for all Americans.In 1964 Congress passed a Civil RightsAct setting penalties for any interference1).with a citizen's right to vote. The law wasmade even stronger in the Voting RightsAct in 1965. Civil rights laws also requiredbusinesses open to the public to serve allpeople, and barred discrimination by em-ployers and unions and in the sale or rentalKen Heymanof housing. As southern blacks began toCivil rights laws resulted in the registrationvote in numbers, it seemed possible thatand voting of large numbers of blacks.what remained of legal discriminationwould soon be ended.officials in the nation, not more than 1800"Black power" and black separatism. Thewere black. Nevertheless, the concentra-cruel killing of Dr. King in Memphis intion of blacks in the cities foretold that they1968 brought grief to millions of Ameri-would shortly control many city halls.cans-black and white alike. Many won-By the late 1960's black demands haddered who would provide leadership for thebecome specific: better job opportunities,civil rights movement. Blacks throughoutbetter housing, better schools, and betterthe country felt blocked by what theycity services (including, particularly, regu-thought was the slowness of change. Somelar garbage collection and dependabletalked of winning "black power," by whichpolice protection). Moreover, black leadersthey seemed to mean working together towere making efforts to teach the rest of thepersuade whites to make reforms. Somepeople what the years of abuse and dis-talked of black separatism, which seemedcrimination had done to blacks as a group.to mean creating separate facilities-suchInfluenced by the example of the blacks,as schools and businesses-for blacks.other minority groups began to call atten-Other blacks tried to persuade youngtion to their own plight.black people in the cities to take a militantMexican-Americans. One of these minor-stand for their rights. Frequently militantity groups, Mexican-Americans, lives al-groups, most notably the Black Panthers,most entirely in the Southwest. They havecame into violent conflict with the police.continued to feel the sting of discrimina-At the same time the call for "black studies"tion and its terrible consequences: slumin schools and colleges became a leadinghousing, scanty education, low-paying jobs,demand of black students.and reduced life expectancy. For thou-Blacks in office. Blacks felt that theysands, migrant farm labor has been themight help to bring about more rapidonly way of life open.change by electing their own candidates toIn the 1960's Mexican-Americans beganoffice. By 1971, out of over 522,000 electedto glimpse fresh hope. Under the magnetic693

leadership of César Chávez, a native ofseventy-one years for all Americans.Yuma, Arizona, the Farm Workers Asso-Divided among 300 tribes, Indians haveciation was formed to seek improvementsonly recently begun to voice their griev-in the wages and working conditions ofances and to be heard. Many are seekingmigrant labor. Since that time Mexican-ways to maintain their Indian identity andAmericans increasingly have demandedat the same time share in the benefits of anrecognition of their civil rights.industrialized America.American Indians. The nation's most ne-In 1970 President Nixon proposed aglected and most isolated minority groupwide-ranging program to give Indians onceconsists of 650,000 American Indians, overmore control over their destiny. He askedtwo-thirds of whom live on or near reser-for funds to aid Indian centers in urbanvations. They are also the fastest-growingareas, to support economic-developmentminority. At the same time, the amountprojects, and to improve health programs.of Indian land has been reduced from 138Puerto Ricans. Americans of Puertomillion acres in 1887 to 55 million in 1970.Rican birth and ancestry also face enor-For over a century, the lives and propertymous obstacles to full participation inof most Indians have been managed by theAmerican life. Hard times in Puerto RicoDepartment of Interior's Bureau of Indianhave led many to seek a better life in theAffairs. The Bureau spends $500 millionUnited States. But, lacking skills for urbanyearly for programs. Nevertheless most In-activities and usually handicapped by notdians live in extreme poverty, with a life ex-knowing English, Puerto Ricans suffer de-pectancy of only forty-five years as againstprivation as well as discrimination.César Chávez (fourth from right) led grape pickers in California on the strikein 1965 that finally - five years later - resulted in union recognition and higher wages.Only after a nationwide bovcott of table grapes was begun in 1968 did the strikers have success,A NATION WITHIN A NATIONThe black struggle for civil rights calledattention to all the people who do not sharein America's riches. The men, women, andchildren-both black and white-who livein grinding poverty number thirty million.These people are invisible to the majorityof Americans. Stranded in the slums of thelarge cities or pushed back into the hills,the poor exist outside the mainstream ofAmerican life.Who are the poor? A poor person is mostoften white and under twenty-one years ofage or over fifty-five. The displaced coalminer working in a grocery store, the un-skilled young man who cannot find a job,and the small farmer forced off the landare all victims of poverty. The abandonedmother with small children and the elderlyperson living in a dingy rooming house arealso painfully aware that they are poor.More and more, other Americans have be-gun to see that these people lack the in-come to buy the goods and services theyneed and-worse-they have few oppor-tunities to increase it.Bob AdelmanAlthough about one-third of the poor liveAverage yearly income among Indians is $1500in rural areas, poverty touches every part- one-half the national poverty level. (Theof the United States. It is found not onlyApache child has an untreated skin disease.)in the grimy ghettos of the big cities and inthe quiet hills of Appalachia but even incapped by inadequate schooling, discrim-rich farming areas and in the so-calledination, and a lack of job skills, blacks,wealthy suburbs.Mexican-Americans, and Indians-asAt least one-half of the poor are south-groups-bear most heavily the burden oferners, even though only one-third of allpoverty.Americans live in the South. And largeOvercrowded and overpriced. During thenumbers of today's urban poor originally1960's knowledge of some of the conditionscame from the South. In fact, since 1940in which poor Americans live began to beover four million poverty-stricken south-widespread. Some make their homes in tar-erners have journeyed to the cities of thepaper shacks with muddy yards or inNorth and West in search of more reward-lonely, run-down farmhouses without elec-ing lives.tricity, gas, or plumbing. Others are crowd-Poverty is most likely to exist not only ined into urban ghettos ridden by crime.certain age groups and in certain parts ofThere, children grow up in dilapidated ten-the United States, but also among membersements with unlit hallways, peeling plaster,of certain minority groups. Severely handi-and drafty rooms.695

people, pollution of the environment will1. Give the main facts about the civil rightsbe arrested. Then natural resources will bemovement. 2. What help has Congress pro-more wisely used. The just demands ofvided? 3. State three views recently held bypeople for improved transportation, hous-blacks. 4. What action have Mexican-Amer-ing, and education will be met. The miseryicans taken? 5. Describe Nixon's proposal toof the poor and discrimination againsthelp the Indians. 6. How many Americansminorities will no longer be shames on thelive in poverty? Among what age groups,conscience of the nation.areas, and groups are most poor peopleDuring most of their history, Americansfound? 7. Give two reasons why manyhave solved many problems by working to-Americans are poorly housed and fed andgether peacefully. Secure in this knowl-receive inadequate medical care. 8. Why doedge, people today can look forward tochildren from poor families often drop outfinding solutions for the tough ones theyof school? 9. Describe three programs de-face. By combining their greater "know-signed to help poor people. 10. Give fivehow" with greater understanding of eachreasons why student protests have occurred.other, present-day Americans can meet any11. List three of the problems Americanscrisis-without force and violence.face today.THE WORKSHOPTHE SHAPERS OF OUR TIMEWORDS FOR KEEPINGTell how each of the following helpedUse the following words to show yourmake the years after the Second Worldunderstanding of the chapter:War a period of crisis or rapid change:Communistfree electionYalta ConferenceelectronicsautomationboycottUnited Nations"Medicare""nuclear club"civil rightsWest GermanJohn F. Kennedycontainment"sit-in"RepublicMao Tse-tungmoralediscriminationNATOTaiwandespairdeprivationFidel Castrocold wartechnical assistancepollutionBrown v. BoardDouglasof EducationMacArthurGRASPING THE ISSUESof TopekaSeoul1. It is a principle of American law thatMartin Luther"McCarthyism"any person be considered innocent until heKing, Jr.Bay of Pigsis proved guilty. How did "McCarthyism"CORE"Iron Curtain"violate this principle?SNCCJoseph Stalin2. In what way is "Medicare" an exten-NAACPNikitasion of the New Deal?Civil RightsKhrushchev3. What events show that the UnitedAct of 1964Apollo 13States has given up isolationism?Voting Rights Acttest-ban treaty4. How has today's technology made it"black power"Vietcongmore urgent than ever before for nationsGreat SocietyLyndon B.to live together peacefully?Peace CorpsJohnson5. In what ways have technological ad-César ChávezRichard M. Nixonvances created problems for Americans?700

