Then he pushed farther into the interior, exploring the Ottawa River route to Lake Huron and the region around the Great Lakes. The Indian threat leads to the New England Confederation. Most of the English treated the Indians like equals, was not of their worship of the "Great Spirit" colonists, unlike settlers in New France, looked on the Indians with scorn. Throughout the seventeenth century there was more or less constant warfare between English settlers and Indians over possession of the land. This prompted the New England colonists to consider measures for common defense. In 1643, representatives of Massachusetts Ray, Plymouth, and the Connecticut towns (Rhode Island was excluded) formed the New England Confederation, a "firm and perpetual league of friendship . . . for offense and defense." The Confederation put down a serious Indian uprising in 1675-1676, but this first attempt at colonial union was abandoned a few years later. The Dominion of New England is short-lived. The next plan to unite the New England colonies was imposed by the British government in the 1680's. The New England colonies, New York, and the Jerseys (page 38) were united by royal order in the Dominion of New England Their colonial assemblies were abolished. AH power was now to rest with the royal governor, Sir Edmund Andros, who was re- Th !s fact panel illustrates they caused by religious. The First Jews in America The first man to set foot on American soil in 1492 may have been a Jew. His name was Luis de Torres, one of Columbus's sailors, who is mentioned in some accounts os the first man off the ship. In following decades, many Jews who were being persecuted in Europe came to the West Indies and South America. The first Jews to settle in the original thirteen colonies arrived in New Amsterdam in 1654. These people were descendants of Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch Jews who had been persecuted by the Spanish and exiled to Brazil. There the Jews made common cause with the Dutch, who in a series of wars with Spain and Portugal had gained a foothold in Brazil. When the Portuguese expelled the Dutch from Brazil, these Jews asked the Dutch for asylum in other parts of their empire. But in their early days the American colonies had little to export, and the English government did not pay much attention to colonial trade. As a result, the colonists were allowed to produce their own iron utensils, fashion beaver hats, make cloth from wool and flax, and manufacture hemp into rope. So long as colonial industry was limited, English officials did not complain. As the colonies grew in number and size, however, they were tempted to do more manufacturing. The ironmasters of Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, for example, wanted to fashion all their bar iron into implements to be sold in the colonies. They did not want to export iron to England and then have to buy it back in finished goods at much higher prices. Similarly. textile producers considered it pointless to ship their raw wool to the mother country and then buy woolen cloth from English merchants. The colonists also wanted to trade with non-British markets. New England ruin distillers preferred a cheaper molasses from the French and Spanish (Caribbean colonies to the more expensive British West Indian molasses. Yet, according to the mercantile theory, they could trade only with British ■ colonies in the Caribbean. Southern planters were tempted to sell their tobacco, rice, and indigo in continental European markets. They did not like having to send them to the mother country, where British merchants collected a commission for sell^ ing them. The Navigation Acts control colonial commerce. By the mid-seventeenth century the British government found it necessary to pass a series of laws regulating colonial trade and industry. Edmund Burke in Parliament, March 22, 1775 This chapter introduction brings out why mother country and colonies drew apart after 1763. After the French and Indian War, Great Britain tried to establish firmer control over the thirteen colonies. Tire colonists. as we have already seen, were expected to supply raw materials to the mother country, buy finished goods from her, obey mercantile regulations, and pay enough taxes to cover the cost of defense and administration. During the war years British officials had blinked at some violations of the law rather than provoke a row with the Americans. After 1763. however, the British attitude* hardened. This was reflected in stricter enforcement of mercantile legislation and in the passage by Parliament of higher taxes. At the same time the colonial attitude toward the mother country was undergoing a change. Defeat of the French in North America made the colonists more secure. Security, in turn, bred self-confidence. Soon the colonists were not merely assuming but demanding the right to handle their own internal affairs, including taxation, in their assemblies. Parliament and King George III refused this demand. It is true that before 1763, there had been some discord between the colonies and the mother country. But from 1763 until 1775 the colonists and the British government engaged in a dramatic war of nerves, punctuated from time to time of riots and disorder. Not until colonists andj British troops clashed at Lexington and Concord, however, did actual fighting break out. New terms are clearly explained.^. The French and Indian War Causes Friction Between the Colonies and England Several disagreements between the American colonies and the mother country arose during the French and Indian War. Both wanted to check the power of the French and their Indian allies, but they disagreed over how to do this. jBritish efforts to prevent the colonists from trading with the enemy were one source of trouble. Disagreement over the role of the colonial militia was another. British attempts to make the colonists help meet the costs of the war and of defense also irritated the Americans. And the war aggravated the currency shortage in the colonies. As we shall see, each of these problems caused friction, although they were largely forgotten in the celebration that marked the end of the war. The colonists protest "writs of assist- ance." Although the colonies were permitted to trade non-enumerated goods (Page 55) with France during peacetime, this trade became illegal when France and Britain were at war. Yet the colonists continued to do business with the French West Indies and New France even after Great Britain was officially drawn into the war in 756. The colonists ignored repeated British warnings. Otis delivered a brilliant speech in which he charged that the writs violated the Englishman's right to be free of unreasonable search and seizure. "A man ... is as secure in his house," said Otis, "as a prince in his castle." One colonist who heard the eloquent young lawyer thought that "Otis was a flame of fire! . . . American independence was then and there horn." Actually independence had not yet been horn, hut Otis helped to stiffen the colonists' opposition to trade regulations. Friction develops over the colonies' war effort. Another source of friction grew out of relations between the colonial militia and the British army. Except in ease of war, each of the thirteen colonies was supposed to provide for its own defense. The colonial militia, in other words, was expected to defend the colonists against the Indians. But if war broke out with France, the British army and navy would help defend the American colonies. In actual practice, most of the money for arms, ammunition, and fortifications came from the British treasury. Moreover, the British provided most of the money for bribing the Indians to leave the colonists in peace. Naturally, during time of war, the British expected colonial militiamen to fight with the British forces under the command of British officers. But after Braddock's defeat at the hands of the French and Indians (page 43), the colonists showed scant re- ble." are listed, and then paragraphs. with the Americans. These French agents, later identified only as X. Y, and Z, made outrageous demands before they would agree even to discuss the seizure of American ships. When the French agents asked for a large sum of money for the "pocket of the Directory," Pinckney replied, "No, no; not a sixpence." The Americans finally put an end to this bargaining, and Marshall returned to America to inform Adams. Congress demanded to see the report, which was soon published as the "XYZ dispatches.' Americans were deeply aroused by the humiliating treatment of their envoys. "Mil- lions for defense, but not one cent for tribute" became a popular slogan. Congress appropriated money to build up the American army and navy, and from 1798 to 1800 the United States and France waged an undeclared war at sea. While Americans captured scores of French vessels, they also suffered heavy losses. France and the United States reach a settlement. Hamilton and his followers pressed Adams for war. but the President refused to yield. In fact, when Adams learned In 1799 that the French government would receive an American minister, he appointed a commission to re-open negotiations with France, even though he knew many Federalists would oppose this action. By the time the commissioners reached France, Napoleon Bonaparte had overthrown the Directory and made himself head of a new government. Napoleon proved easier to deal with than the Directory, and in 1800 the two countries signed an agreement to end the French-American treaties of 1778. Tn addition, France agreed to respect American rights on the high seas but refused to pay for the damage done to American shipping. Though some Federalists had little liking for this agreement. President Adams never regretted the mission he sent to France. Toward the end of his life he said: "I desire no other inscription over my gravestone than; 'Here lies John Adams, who took upon himself the responsibility of peace with France in the year 1800.'" Congress passes the Alien and Sedition Acts. Meanwhile, a new conflict had broken out between the Federalists and Republicans. The criticism of Adams' policies by Republican newspapers was begin*! ning to hurt the Federalists. Moreover, the Republican Party was rapidly gaining new members, including many of the immigrants who came to this country in the 1790's. Alarmed by these developments, the Federalists decided to use the quarrel with France as an excuse for striking at the Republicans. Claiming a national emergency* they forced four controversial measures through Congress in DOS. (1) The Naturalization Act required a foreigner to live fourteen years in the United States, rather than five years, before lie could become a citizen and vote. (2) The Alien Act permitted the President to deport aliens whom he judged "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." The Sedition Act, on the other hand, was vigorously enforced. More thaB I twenty Republican editors were arreste* • and ten were convicted. Matthew Lyon, "| Vermont congressman and editor, went WJ jail for saying that he saw in President 1 Adams "even.' consideration of public "e I fare swallowed tip in a continual grasp power, an unbounded thirst for ridiculo®** pomp, foolish adulation, and selfish aV-y rice." Recoil the reasoning in the Zenger case, pag* 64. Political activism has lottg been a tradition in the Adams family. Abigail Adams (above left), wife of President John Adams, was a gifted writer and a true feminist, noted for Iter keen wit and political awareness. In a letter to her husband, written in 1774, she threatened him with a female "rebellion" if the framers of the new govern- rnent did not grant an equal voice to women. Her son, John Quincy Adams (right), became the sixth President. His son, Charles Francis (center), served in the House of Representatives and as minister to Great Britain. Later generations of the Adams family continued in this tradition. sure that students understand the compact theory, states' rights, and the right of nullification. Kentucky and Virginia protest the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Republicans made good use of the Alien and Sedition Acts to denounce the Federalists. They attacked the laws as violations of the First Amendment, which guarantees freedom of speech and the press. Protests from Ken- Jacky and Virginia carried the most weight. Tlie Kentucky legislature adopted a set of resolutions drawn up in part by Thomas Jefferson. These resolutions held that the kderal government had been formed by a c°tnpact (agreement) among the states, '''Hereby each state relinquished certain J ^mhte powers to the central government. ,nce the states had not specifically granted r°ngrcss any power to pass the Alien and _ dition Acts, those acts were illegal. When -°ngress overstepped the powers granted _° H by the Constitution, then the only dglitful remedy" was for the states to ec*are such acts "unauthoritative, void, of no force" within their boundaries, entucky asked the other states to join in glaring the Alien and Sedition Acts null nd void and in seeking their repeal at the next session of Congress. The Virginia legislature approved a similar set of resolutions drafted by James Madison. None of the other state legislatures went this far in protesting against the Federalist measures. But the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions had great impact. They raised the fundamental question of whether or not a state had the right to declare an act of Congress unlawful. This question of states' rights was to be raised many times in American history — especially by southern states in the decades before the Civil War. The immediate effect of the Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions was to provide ammunition for the Republicans in the election of 1S00. The Republicans win the election of 1800. By the end of the 1790's, many of the country's small fanners, skilled workers, and tradesmen had become members of the Republican Party. These Republicans, led by Jefferson and Madison, attacked the whole Federalist program: Hamilton's financial policy, loose interpretation of the Constitution, the growing centralization of govem- The settlement of New Archangel (now Sitka) was the headquarters of Russian colonization in Alaska. The fort at right defended the settlement against Indians. Th" settlement was named after Archangel, a Russian port on the White Sea, States and Britain jointly protest against any action European powers might take to restore the Latin American colonies to Spain. Adams favors independent action. When Cannings proposal reached Washington, Monroe's Cabinet gave it immediate consideration. The President was inclined to accept. He consulted former Presidents Jefferson and Madison, both of whom favored a joint Anglo-American declaration. Secretary of State John Quincy Adams, however, opposed this plan, lie thought the United States should act alone. His reasons were these: (1) lie did not think the European nations would actually invade South America; and, if they did try, the powerful British navy would stop them anyway. (2) Canning had also proposed that the United States and Britain themselves promise not to annex any Spanish-American territory. But Adams thought it unwise to tie this country's hands, for there was always the possibility that Cuba or Texas might some day ask for annexation to the United States. Americans went west for many reasons. The most powerful attraction was cheap, fertile land. Some land in the South was losing its fertility, and a growing population needed more land. Fanners in New England had long fought a discouraging battle with poor soil and a short growing season. Many of them now wanted to move on to more promising land. Hard times in the East after the war caused others to seek a new start in the West. The removal of hostile Indians was important in encouraging westward migration. The power of the Indians had been broken by Tecumseh's death in 1813 and Jackson's decisive victory over the Creeks in 1814 (page 204). The British withdrawal to Canada and the expulsion of the Spaniards from Florida deprived the Indians of their European allies. With their power to resist American settlers shattered, many tribes were persuaded by government agents to move west of the Mississippi. Turnpikes lead west. Better roads also stimulated the westward movement after 1S15. A network of turnpikes began to appear (map, page 302). In the North, the Genesee and Catskill Turnpikes crossed New York State. From the Middle States, settlers took the Philadelphia-Laneaster pike and then followed the Forbes Road across the mountains to Pittsburgh, where they could continue by water on the Ohio River. The most heavily traveled route was the National Road between Cumberland, Maryland, and Wheeling on the Ohio River. Completed in 1818, this road was later extended to Vandalia, Illinois. Farther south, travelers took the Wilderness Road through Cumberland Gap. Partly because of the direction of these roads. Americans tended to move west in parallel linos during the 1820's and '30's. New Englanders pushed into western New York, then along the Great Lakes, and eventually into Michigan and Wisconsin. Congress eventually passed a measure permitting squatters to buy, for the actual cost of a survey, the lands they were living on and "cultivating. Though the price of land was "ot reduced, Jackson indicated that he would favor such a step when government ijneome no longer depended on land sales. Jackson takes a stand on internal improvements. The western supporters of Jackson were also anxious to secure federal funds for internal-improvement projects. Uncertain as to Jackson's attitude toward such measures, they proposed construction °f a road from Maysville to Lexington, Kentucky. at federal expense. The Westerners arRued that it would serve a national purpose as a post road. Much to their dismay, Jackson vetoed the Maysville Hoad Bill. After listening to lavish praise of Jefferson's defense of the states against the central government. Jackson was called on to deliver a toast. He rose to his full height of over six feet and, looking directly at John C. Calhoun, said: "Our Federal Union — it must be preserved!" Unmoved. Calhoun responded: "The Union — next to our liberty, the most dear!" After a pause, he added, "May we always remember that it can only be preserved by respecting the rights of the states and distributing equally the benefits and burdens of the Union." Calhoun and Van Buren maneuver for position. Jackson's forthright defense of "our Federal Union" jolted the Southerners. Yet they waited throughout 1830 and 1831 to sec whether Vice-President Calhoun or Secretary of State Wan Buren would become Jackson's most influential adviser. The struggle between these two ambitious politicians was the talk of the capital. Van Buren called Jackson's attention to a letter revealing that Calhoun had wanted to punish Jackson for his raid into Florida during Monroe's administration (page 219). The President now interpreted this as a personal affront and referred darkly to the "insin- cerity" of his Vice-President. Van Buren also used a controversy over the wife of a Cabinet officer to widen the These- three, paragraphs illustraf may influence the course of breach between Jackson and Calhq Peggy O'Neale Timberlake, the attracts! daughter of a Washington tavern keep* had been admired by Senator John Earn (page 210) before her husband died aboard a ship in the Mediterranean. Eaton wanted to marry the widow Timberlake but, knotw ing he would be included in Jackson's Cabinet, he consulted the President-elect. Jackson was convinced that the rumors about Peggy's past were as baseless as those which had hurt his own wife (page 239), and thj marriage took place. Much to JacksoiM surprise, however, Washington society re-; fused to accept Mrs. Peggy Eaton. The] leader of the social boycott was none other! than Mrs. John C. Calhoun. Following her lead were the wives of the Cabinet officials appointed by Jackson on Calhoun's advice. Peggy's only public champion was the dap-' per widower Martin Van Buren. The social tempest over Peggy Eaton per*j plexed and angered Jackson. When asked for advice, Van Buren suggested that bothh he and Secretary of War Eaton resign from, the Cabinet. This would make it necessary for the three embarrassed Calhoun men to resign also. Jackson could then reorganize his official family, ridding himself of the undesirable Southerners. This is exactly what happened in the spring of 1831. Eaton was named governor of Florida Territory, and Van Buren was appointed minister to Great Britain. Van Buren's appointment re-' quired Senate approval, and since the vote | was a tie, Calhoun (as presiding officer of the Senate) had the pleasure of blocking it. This petty action prompted Senator] Thomas Ilart Benton to remark that the Senate had "broken a minister and elected a Vice-President." In New York State, for example, canal promoters got a law passed prohibiting the railroads from carrying freight. Later, this law was amended to permit the railroads to haul freight during the winter months when canal operation was suspended. Elsewhere the railroads met opposition from those who had invested money in turnpikes, bridges, steamboats, and stagecoach companies. Many citizens thought it dangerous to travel at the giddy speed of fifteen miles an hour. Yet the railroads had obvious advantages over other forms of transportation. Unlike canals they did not have to follow water- level routes, nor were they as much affected by floods, ice, and snow. They cost less to build than canals, and they provided faster travel than either canals or turnpikes. The uncomfortable open coaches were soon replaced with enclosed cars, which provided protection against cinders and dirt. The railroads quickly proved themselves profitable carriers of both passengers and freight, and adventurous investors poured money into railroad construction. Railroad promoters publicized their plans in newspapers and pamphlets and at public meetings. "It is almost impossible," noted one man in the 1830's, "to open a paper without finding an account of some railroad meeting. An epidemic on this subject seems nearly as prevalent throughout the country as the influenza." The telegraph improves communica tion. Improvements in communication and transportation went hand in hand. As the railroad greatly speeded up travel, so the invention of the telegraph revolutionized communication. By 1837, Samuel F. B. Morse had perfected an electrical instrument by which combinations of dots and dashes could be transmitted over a metal wire. Morse was unable, however, to finance the construction of a telegraph line, nor could he find private investors who were interested. Finally he turned to friends in Washington, who persuaded Congress to appropriate $30,000 dollars for the construction of a line between Baltimore and Wash- in Washington. Then he tapped out a qu^ tation from the Bible: "What hath God wrought!" anti a friend in Baltimore received the message. The success of the telegraph was assured. Within a few years. New York was linked by telegraph with other eastern cities and even with Chicago, New York City sets the pace. The brisk growth of New York City reflected the effect on American cities of the changes described in this section. New York took the lead in establishing telegraph connections with the rest of the country, just as it had pushed canal, turnpike, and railroad construction. By mid-century New York, with almost half a million inhabitants, was the country's most important city. New Yorkers had a plentiful supply of water piped from reservoirs; and gaslights lined the paved streets. Horse-drawn omnibuses handled the heavy traffic. Paid fire companies and uniformed policemen protected the city dwellers. Other major cities introduced similar improvements at about the same time. But neither Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston. Charleston, nor New Orleans could match the pace of New York. A traveler in New York in 1840 observed: "In the streets all is hurry and bustle; the very carts, instead of being drawn by horses at a walking pace, are often met at a gallop, and always at a brisk trot." He went on to note that the people "seem to enjoy this bustle, and add to it by their own rapid pace ... as if under the apprehension of being too late. New York's enterprising populace set tn® I pace for the emerging industrial society. > CHECK-UP $" Key. 1. How was water transportation improved dvr- ing the 1830's? How was railroad construe tion promoted? Who were the oppon"r>" of the railroads? 2. What advantages did railroads have °ver canals and turnpikes? How did the **'•" graph revolutionize communication? 3. How had changes in transportation and com munication affected a city such as New Yof" by mid-century? ington. In 1844, Morse set up his telegraph equipment in a room of the Supreme Court The freight moved on New York State conols increased from obout 1.2 million tons in 1837 to 3. million tons in 1850, An Industrial Society Takes Shape The growth of industry and improvements in transportation and communication had important effects on America's economic life. Among them were the development of a new kind of business organization and the forming of labor unions. Businessmen form corporations. The earliest factories were small and had only a few pieces of machinery. Usually these factories were owned and run by one man, a family, or perhaps several partners. In the 1820's and 1830's, however, manufacturing establishments generally increased in size and in the amount of machinery they used. Because the establishment of these larger factories required much more money, some businessmen pooled their resources, or capital, in corporations. About 2.500,000 immigrants arrived during the 1830's and 1840's, whereas only 150.000 foreigners had come to this country in the 1820's. This sharp increase was due in part to expanding economic opportunities in the United States — (1) the opening up of western lands which could be purchased at a reasonable price and (2) the many jobs available in industry. Moreover, immigrants could get passage across the Atlantic for as little as 20 dollars. During the 1820's most of the immigrants had come from England, Northern Ireland, Wales, and Scotland. But in the next two decades increasingly large numbers of German and Irish immigrants arrived (page 305). The proportion of Americans living in cities increases. Although many immigrants and native-born Americans moved west to take up farming, others settled in the cities, thus swelling the urban population. AmerP can cities were growing faster than the nation as a whole. In 1790 only one person in thirty had lived in a community with a population of 8000 or more; in 1820, one in twenty; and by 1840, one in twelve. Cinein- number of urban ploces increased from 24 in 1790 to 236 in 1B50. ^ An interesting example of benevolent paternalism. It was a trade center for the surrounding region and also a manufacturing and meat-packing center — hence its nickname "Porkopolis." In the Northwest the newer cities such as Chicago and Milwaukee were expanding rapidly. In the South the growing city of Mobile was able to snatch trade from Charleston and Savannah. New Orleans also was experiencing a period of phenomenal growth. Urban growth in the Northeast was marked by a steady increase in the size of the older cities. A number of settlements between Albany and Buffalo became thriving communities because of increased trade and industry along the Erie Canal. And the growth of smaller towns centered around a particular factory or industry was spectacular. Northeastern cities not only attracted immigrants but also drew thousands of native-born Americans who left the land to work in the cities. New England farmers found it increasingly difficult to compete with the more fertile West Some sold their land and moved west themselves. Those who stayed on their farms raised fruits, vegetables, and dairy products for nearby urban markets. Some farm families were so located that the men could care for the fields and livestock while the women and children took factory jobs. Lowell is a "factory town." Lowell, Massachusetts, was a typical industrial town of the Jacksonian Era. Located on the falls of the Merrimack River, Lowell was a natural site for the many textile mills constructed there in the 1820's and I830's. Mill owners recruited girls in their teens or early twenties from New England farm homes, offering them dormitory housing, close supervision, and attractive wages. The girls worked from sunup to sundown six days a week. Nevertheless, they found time to write and publish monthly magazines and to attend Sunday school and religious services. After the Panic of 1837 (page 249), however, wages were reduced and working conditions in Lowell worsened. Other New England mills were poor rivals of those in Lowell. They paid less, enforced harsh work rules, and required Even at this early date the strike was widely used women and children to work even longer hours. The unfortunate children who were employed in these mills at an early age were "brought up as ignorant as the Arabs of the desert." Wage earners become dissatisfied. \s factories grew larger, the worker had less and less personal contact with his "boss* In factories owned by corporations, the employer was a manager rather than an owner. These managers simply carried out the orders of the board elected by the corporation owners (stockholders). Both managers and owners were often more concerned with profits than with the welfare of the workers. Skilled workers, whose services were in great demand, could usually change jobs if they wished. But most factory workers had no w'ay of securing better working conditions or higher wages. If they staged a protest meeting, as the Lowell girls did in the 1830's, they usually lost their jobs. If they tried to organize any opposition, they were not only fired but black-listed. This meant that their employer circulated their names to other employers so that no factory would hire them. During the 1830's, workers grew increasingly uneasy. While inflation raised the cost of living, wages failed to keep pace. Indeed, many textile factories even cut wages because farm workers and newly arrived immigrants would work for lower pay. The earliest labor organizations are short-lived. In the three years preceding the Panic of 1837, more than 150 labor organizations were formed in Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and other cities. Most of these small unions involved only one kind of worker. Women, more* over, had to form their own organizations. The first country-wide labor organization was the National Trades Union, established in 1834. This union favored a ten-hour day for all laborers, regulation of child labor in textile factories, and free, public education- By 1837 its membership had grown to) more than 300,000 and it had conductedj about 175 strikes. The Panic of 1837 and the depression which followed undermined the National Trades Union and many other labor groups- in an effort to secure better working conditiortf"^H Yet these early efforts at unionization had made some important gains. Several state legislatures gave limited support to the ten- hour day, and President Van Buren ordered a ten-hour day for manual laborers employed by the federal government. More important was a decision handed down by the Massachusetts Supreme Court. In Commonwealth v. Hunt (1842), the court ruled that labor unions were legal organizations, not conspiracies as the courts had previously held. But the labor movement had little real success until after the Civil War. ► CHECK-UP See Key. 1. How did the growth of industry lead to the formation of corporations? Whot were the advantages of the corporation? 2. Why did immigration increase greatly during the 1830's and 1840's? Why did the urban population increase? 3. Why did working conditions begin to worsen in the lote 1830'$? How did employers try to keep workers from organizing? 4. What goals were sought by labor unions during the 1830's? What gains were made? white men could vote, the nation must find a way of educating its citizens. Realizing that education was the key to a better life for their children, working people used their newly won votes and their influence in workingmen's parties and labor unions to demand free schools. A group of Philadelphia workingmen stated their case this way: "Our government is republican; our education should be equally so." Nevertheless, many Americans opposed the drive for equal educational opportunity. Some complained that tax-supported schools would be too costly. A conservative newspaper said such schools would be a "com- pulsory application of the means [wealth] of the richer for the direct use of the poorer classes." Others argued that if farmers and laborers were educated, they would seek better jobs and thus upset the established order: Hie peasant must labor during those hours' of the day which his wealthy neighbor can give to abstract culture of his inind; otherwise, the earth would not yield enough for the subsistence of all; the mechanic cannot abandon the operations of his trade for general studies; if he should, most of the conveniences of life . . . would be wanting. Educational Opportunities Are Expanded From the earliest days of the republic, some Americans had urged the establishment of free, tax-supported schools extending from the elementary level to a national university. Nevertheless, in 1830 not a single state had tax-supported schools at which attendance was compulsory. During the Jacksonian Era, however, educational opportunities were broadened. Demand for educational change grows strong. The demand for free, tax-supported schools was voiced by many groups. Reformers pointed out that since all free Opposition also came from religious groups who had their own educational institutions and did not want to be taxed for public schools. Owners of other private schools thought they might lose many of their pupils if public schools were started. Reformers promote free primary schools. Though the opponents of educational reform put iip a stiff fight, they eventually lost. They had no leaders comparable to Horace Mann of Massachusetts or Henry Barnard of Connecticut, men who worked tirelessly to publicize the advantages of free elementary schools. As secretary of the Board of Education in Massachusetts, Horace Mann issued annual reports which were read by people throughout the country. By 1850 most states in the North and West had accepted the idea of tax-supported public schools. Approximately 80,000 elementary schools existed by that time, most of them in northern towns and cities. Th is quotation suggests a. yrcat change in public opinion. Consiaer the present emphasis on the education of drop- A direction which IS receiving great omphosis today. to win his own salvation by good works. Many people joined the Unitarians, who held that no individual's fate was predetermined. Unitarianism spread rapidly in the 1820's and soon rivaled the strength of Congregationalism in New England. Yet the writer Ralph Waldo Emerson and others as well felt that the Unitarian beliefs did not fit the religions needs of their generation. Like many men of his time, Emerson was a strong individualist. He believed that man should cultivate his own power of reason. Emerson also wanted man to develop to the fullest degree the small spark of divinity which he believed to be in everyone's soul. The surest route to an understanding of God, thought Emerson, was through an appreciation of Nature. Those who accepted Emerson's ideas called themselves TranscendentaUsts. They believed that men could "transcend" the need for organized churches and creeds, and establish their own relationship with the Creator and with the universe. Religion on the frontier often took the form of revivalism. Enthusiastic throngs turned up at "camp meetings," where traveling preachers exhorted the people to give themselves to Cod. Some encouraged their listeners to show acceptance of the message by "the shakes" or other physical contortions. Rut such revivalists as Charles G. Finney asked Christians to seek salvation hv performing charitable deeds, flic and others like him were a strong force for turning Protestant religious enthusiasm toward .social reform in the 1830's and '40's. New religions are founded. Despite changes in the older religions, many dissatisfied people turned to new prophets. William Miller founded the Adventists in the lS40's, after causing considerable excitement with his prediction that the world was soon to end. The Mormon movement owed its origin to Joseph Smith, who claimed to have received divine records and revelations. These lie published in the llook of Mormon and other writings, and established the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (1830). Still they aroused the bitterness of outsiders, however, especially after Smith sanctioned plural marriage for Mormon leaders. When an angry mob murdered Smith in 1844, Brigham Young, an extraordinarily abb man, became the Mormon leader. Yotfl directed the mass migration of the Mor-1 mons from Nauvoo to the basin of the Great Salt Lake in what was then Mexican territory. It was a tremendous undertaking, but the Mormons had the perseverance t" push on. Under Young's guidance they turned their "promised land" into a pros* perous co-operative community. Catholics meet discrimination. *19 Mormons were not the only religious group to meet hostility. The rapid growth of the Catholic Church — from 600,000 members in 1830 to 3,500,000 in 1850 — alarmed many American Protestants The increase was largely due to the arrival of Irish immigrants, almost all of them Catholic, and some German Catholic immigrants. Construction of new churches and parochial schools frightened a few Americans into taking direct action against the Catholics Riots broke out in the larger cities. :9 convent in Charlestown, Massachusetts, was burned in 1834. And several writers pub* lished attacks on the Irish and the Catholics. At the same time, however, the new western states adopted constitutions which placed no political restrictions on Catholics. Jews, or agnostics. Furthermore, many <9 the older states removed religious tests nfl voting or holding public office. Reformers seek changes in American society. Some Protestant churches in the 1830's and 1840's, as we have seen, placed J increasing emphasis on "good works- 1 Moreover, many Americans were disturbed by the social changes resulting from the growth of industry and of cities. As a re* | suit, the Jacksonian Era was marked by j See the American Heritage article by Bdllngton, cited on page 273. The Mormons suffered extreme hardship on their westward migration. Even the women pulled hand carts through snowy mountain passes (above). Under Brigham Young's leadership, the Mormons settled in the valley of the Great Salt Lake in Utah. Their determination. industry, and irrigation of arid lands helped make Salt Lake City the prosperous community it is today (right). the rise of reform movements that sought to relieve injustice and human suffering. Ideal communities are founded. Some people went so far as to propose the establishment of new communities in which men and women could live more simply and happily. Emerson jokingly claimed that every man he met on the street had such a plan in his vest pocket. Some of these schemes were actually tried. An English reformer. Robert Owen, came to America in thc 1820's and established an ideal" community in New Harmony, Indiana. But friction within the settlement and opposition from neighbors destroyed the harmony within a few years. Another experimental community was Brook Farm, which a group of TranscendentaUsts (page 268) started outside Boston in 1841. Yet Brook Farm lasted longer than ideal communities; it closed only after fire in 1846 destroyed the main building. The temperance movement starts. Some reformers started a crusade against the use of intoxicating liquor. Drinking was indeed an evil during the Jacksonian Era. One man complained: "No keel of a vessel could be laid, no frame of a house or barn reared, in any of the Atlantic States; no log house be put together west of the mountains, without the presence of several gallons of New England Rum, Jamaica Spirits, or Western Whisky." The first effective organized movement against excessive drinking started in Boston in the 1820's, and the American Society for the Promotion of Temperance was soon formed. Four railroad lines — the Baltimore and Ohio, Pennsylvania, New York Central, and Erie — had crossed the mountains. Baltimore, Philadelphia, New York, and Boston had rail connections with western cities. Railroads reach the West. During the 1850's most of the new railroad track was laid in the West. Because people in this part of the country had little money to invest, railroad builders looked to the state and federal governments for aid, j The states helped by lending money, buying railroad stock, and guaranteeing the securities issued by the railroads. In 1850 Congress made its first land grant to encourage railroad construction. The land was given to states through which a line from Chicago to the Gtdf of Mexico would pass. But the - federal government retained alternate sections of land along this route, hoping that rising land values would offset the cost of the original land grant. This legislation committed the federal government to a policy of helping to finance this badly needed, but expensive, form of internal ^improvement. It was the Illinois Central Railroad that received this federal land grant. Promoted by Stephen Douglas, the Illinois Central linked Chicago with Galena and Cairo. Illinois (both on the Mississippi River), and later with the Gulf port of Mobile. [This was the first great north-south railroad built; in the United States. /Almost all other railroads built during the 1850's tied the West and the East together. Many lines crossed Michigan, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois, and some pushed across the Mississippi River into Missouri and Iowa. The intersection of land and water routes made Chicago the rail center of the West. More than 10,000 miles of railroads were built in the West during the 1850's. Thus, the railroads, even more than the canals, drew traffic away from the Mississippi. And they pro^ This railroad further reduced traffic on the Mississippi. vided the East and West with an efficient transportation system that proved a great advantage during the Civil War. Clipper ships enjoy a brief glory. While railroads were reaching into the West, American clippers reigned supreme on the high seas. Noted for their long, slim hulls and tall masts, the first of these graceful ships had been built in the 1810's. Donald McKay of Boston was the most famous clipper designer, and his best- known ship was Ffi/mg Cloud. On her maiden voyage in 1851 this clipper traveled 374 miles in a single day, much faster than any packet or steamship of that time. The clippers were used in the trade with the Orient and also in the Atlantic trade. Whenever they appeared in British ports, they excited the envy of shipowners, one of whom said: The reason will be evident to any one who will walk through the docks at Liverpool. He will see the American ships, long, sharp built, beautifully painted and rigged, and remarkable for their fine appearance and white canvas. He will see the English vessels, short, round, and dirty, resembling great black tubs. Clippers also engaged in the slave trade, even though this had been outlawed by both the United States and Britain. Capable of outdistancing the British and American steamships that patrolled the African coast, the slave clippers brought enormous profits to their owners. During the gold rush of 1819, American clippers carried many fortune seekers around Cape Horn to California. Ilyin" Cloud held the New York- San Francisco record of 89 days. Clippers give way to steamships. Steamships soon lured most of the California traffic away from the clippers. Corne- I lius Vanderbilt and other steamship operators sent their vessels from New York to Panama or Nicaragua. Imports were paid for by the export of southern cotton, western wheat and flour, and in the 1850's by California gold. Much of this trade was carried in American ships. Commerce with the Orient expanded sharply during these years as Americans secured new trading privileges in Chinese ports and in Siam. Most noteworthy, however, was Commodore Matthew (7 Perry's success in opening up trade with Japan. In 1853 Perry sailed into Japanese waters, previously closed to most outsiders This show of naval strength enabled him to arrange a commercial treaty with Japan which provided new markets for American merchants. \ CHECK-UP Key. 1. What new industries contributed to the economic growth of the Northeast and West? What were the results of the development of more east-west routes for railroad and water transportation? Why did the importance of the Great Lakes system increase while the Mississippi declined in importance? 2. What major railroad systems had developed by the 1 850's? How was the construction of a railroad connecting Chicago with the South subsidized? 3. Why were the clipper ships notable? Why did they soon give way to steamships? How did foreign trade fare during the 1850's? 1 I lie total value of imports and exports in 1843 "as 125 million dollars. By I860 the value of Antcrii in foreign trade had climbed to 688 million dollars. Immigrants Settle in the North and West The tide of immigration swells. The number of people who came to American shores increased tremendously in the 1840's and 50 s. By 1860 the United States had a white population of 27 million. J Approximately 4 million of these people had come from other countries, and most of the for- eign-horn lived north of the Mason and. Dixon Line. 2 The North and West, therefore, gained the benefits of the great tide of immigration. But these regions also had to deal with the social and economic problems of absorbing the newcomers. Famine drives the Irish to America. Tli>* largest group of immigrants during these two decades was Irish. For some time Ireland had been troubled by potato rot, a plant disease which reached major proportions in 1845 when half the potato crop was lost. The disease and a drought caused even larger crop losses the following year. Ireland was so dependent on the potato for food that the crop failures meant starvation for many thousands of people. Those who had small savings or could barter their household goods for passage to America emigrated. Others secured money from friends or relatives already in the United States. Some made the crossing in the reeking holds of ships that had carried fish to European ports and took the desperate Irishmen to America as ballast on the return voyage. Many passengers died of malnutrition and disease on these transatlantic- crossings. When Congress passed laws to improve conditions on immigrant ships, the shipowners evaded these restrictions by landing their human cargo at Quebec. Most of the Irish immigrants in the 1840's and '50s settled in the cities of the Northeast. Some wished to be near relatives or friends already living in this area. Others took the first jobs they could find — 2 The South had only 500,000 foreign-born in Job. were eos.er to find in the North then In the slave .totes. as unskilled labor in factories, mines, and quarries, or on railroad or canal construction gangs. Though most of the Irish had been farmers in their homeland, they were generally too poor to buy land in this country. Hence the Irish colonies in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia expanded rapidly. Soon almost every industrial city of the Northeast had a sizable group of Irish who worked in textile plants, iron foundries, and small factories. Irish women and girls found employment as domestic servants, and some worked in the textile mills. By I860 more than a million and a half Irish people had migrated to America. German immigrants prefer the Middle West. The Germans accounted for another large proportion of the total immigration. More than a million Germans had come to America by 1860. Potato blight, poor harvests, and political unrest drove thousands of Germans from their homeland in the 1840's and early '50's. A number of well- educated Germans fled because they had taken part in an unsuccessful revolution in 1848. Many skilled craftsmen, put out of work by the introduction of machines, also sought a new life in the United States. These immigrants usually bought passage on merchant ships sailing from North Sea ports. Once disembarked in America, the Germans tended to travel to the Middle West. Many bought farm laud in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and Wisconsin; smaller numbers settled in Missouri and Texas. They formed communities referred to as "New Germany's," and many of their towns had such Old World names as Berlin, Hanover, Dresden, Frankfort, Hamburg, and Westphalia. Western cities, especially St. Louis, Milwaukee, Cincinnati, and Chicago, also attracted the German newcomers. Craftsmen quickly found jobs in these industrial centers; and Gennan writers, printers, doctors. lawyers, and teachers soon mastered English and found positions for themselves. These German settlers left a definite mark on American life. Their love of music and their interest in physical fitness led to the formation of musical groups and athletic- societies. German food, cigars, and beer spread well beyond the limits of the "New Germany's." So too did the German celebration of Christmas with decorated trees, carols, children's toys, and a Santa Claus who was far jollier than the Dutch Saint Nicholas. Perhaps the best-known Gennan immigrant of this period was Carl Schurz, a political refugee who arrived in 1852 and practiced law in Wisconsin. He became active in American politics, served as an officer in the Union army during the Civil War, and was later elected to the Senate from Missouri. Immigrants arrive from other lands. Ireland and Germany provided by far the largest number of newcomers at this time. But about half a million emigrants came from England, Scotland, and Wales during the 1840's and '50's. There were also Swiss and French immigrants and some French Canadians. In addition, a number of European Jews came to America in these decades. They generally settled in cities, where they worked as peddlers, merchants, cloth- ing-manufacturers, teachers, and physicians. Some West Indian Jews of Spanish-Portu- gnese ancestry emigrated to southern cities. One of them, Judah P. Benjamin of New Orleans, was twice elected to the United States Senate. About 70,000 Scandinavians also came to America before 1860. Bad harvests and economic depression had driven these people from Norway, Sweden, and Denmark. Some were drawn to the New World by glowing descriptions, such as this account by Frcdrika Bremer, a Swedish writer: What a glorious new Scandinavia might not Minnesota become. Here would the Swede find his clear romantic lakes... . The climate, the situation, the character of the scenery agrees with our people better than any other of the American states. The Scandinavians, like the Germans, preferred the Middle West. Large numbers of them settled on farms in northern Illinois, Iowa, Wisconsin, and Minnesota. Opposition to immigration develops. Most Americans welcomed the tide of newcomers, but for various reasons some people felt hostile toward them. Religious preju- | For this ond other reosons many Scandinavians settled in Minnesota Mote the voriou* kinds of prejudice encountered 4 by onii. Was one reason for anti-immigrant feeling during the I840's and '50's. Much of this kind of hostility- was directed at the Irish, almost all of whom were Catholics. I pnnily mobs burned Catholic churches and Irish homes in Philadelphia, and friction also appeared in Boston, New York, and Baltimore. Economic conditions caused other Americans to find fault with the immigrants. In (he Northeast the newcomers, eager to work even for low wages, displaced native- born American workers in many factories. The immigrants showed little interest in the labor movement, a fact which partly accounts for the weakness of early labor unions. Farther west, German and Scandinavian farmers competed with native- born Americans for choice parcels of land, and this, too, aroused jealousy. Still further reasons account for the opposition to immigrants. The newcomers Inuring into American cities crowded together in slums. In New York, for example, I they took over the older Dutch housing on the lower East Side and in Greenwich Village. One-family homes were subdivided I into tiny apartments, and boarders were packed into attics and cellars. Unscrupu- I Ions landlords filled the yards with wooden shanties to accommodate additional immigrants. Crime and disease festered in these crowded, dirty neighborhoods. Some European governments took advantage of America's "open-door" immigration policy by encouraging the departure of criminals, paupers, and the mentally ill. Many such newcomers ended up in American poorhouses and jails. Although some ports levied a small tax on all immigrants, there were no federal laws restricting immigration until after the Civil War. Distrust of the immigrants developed for Political reasons too. Political bosses in the cities controlled the immigrant votes, and fhe Irish or German bosses seldom saw eye- to-eye with native-born American politicians. As early as the 1820's the Irish had taken control of Tammany Hall (page 171), and bv the 1850's they exerted a powerful influence in New York City politics. Moreover, some Americans were afraid that im- Millions of People 3^1 1830 1840 1850 1860 1870 Immigration wax an important reason for the increase in population from 1820 to 1870. Famine in Ireland and political unrest in Germany led many people to seek new opportunities in America. Immigrants would not understand or support American democratic principles. The immigrants themselves added to the increasing tension between groups. The Germans and Scandinavians, most of them Protestants, were critical of the Catholic Irish. And the Irish in turn looked down on the Negroes, with whom they sometimes competed for jobs and housing in northern cities. Feeling against the newcomers was strong enough in the late 1840's to spawn an anti-immigrant, anti-Catholic organization in New York State. Called the "Supreme Order of the Star-Spangled Banner," it accepted as members only those who could prove that their parents and grandparents had been native-born and had never been Catholic. The organization soon spread to other states and took as its name the American Party. Determined to preserve "America for the Americans," the members promised to vote only for native- born candidates. When members were pressed for information about this new political party, they replied: "I know noth- ing." Soon they were called the Know- Nothing Party. For a few years the Know-Nothings seemed to he gathering strength. In 1854 and 1855 they won control of Baltimore's city government. Their candidates became 307 Here || an early example of nolivism. governors in several New England states, where opposition to the Irish was especially strong in factory towns. The Know-Noth- ings also scored political victories in California, where feeling ran high against the Chinese. Moreover, many Know-Nothing candidates won election to state legislatures and to Congress. After 1856, however, political attention focused on the quarrel over slavery, and Know-Nothing strength tapered off. By 1860 the party had disintegrated, though hostility to immigrants unfortunately had not disappeared. Immigrants contribute to American life. The great tide of immigration in the 1840's and '30's, then, caused problems for the North and West. But the hard-working newcomers provided much of the man power that made possible the rapid industrial and agricultural growth of the free states. In time, the immigrants also enriched the cultural and intellectual life of the whole country. CHECK-UP See Key. 1. From whot countries did large numbers of immigrants come to America during the 1840's and 1850's? Explain why in each case. Where did each tend to settle? 2. Why did opposition to immigration develop? What was the Know-Nothing Party? Reform Movements Draw the Free St at es T ogether Many Jacksonian reforms continue. Many of the social changes that began in the Jacksonian Era (Chapter 12) were carried forward in the North and West during the 1840's and '50's. In addition to more public schools and state universities, the country's educational facilities were expanded by parochial schools and such Catholic colleges as Holy Cross (1843). Note the origins of the te Dorothea Dix's campaign for better treat ment of the insane made considerable liead- way in the 1850's. The lyeeum movement continued to be popular. Newspaper cjr. eolation was increasing, and two new mag* zines. Harper's New Monthly Magazine and The Atlantic Monthly, appeared in the 1850's. Both soon had many readers. Temperance laws are passed. Temperance leaders kept up their campaidH| against strong drink (page 269). Much publicity resulted from the activities of the j Washingtonian Temperance Society, group of former alcoholics who testified to the evils of liquor. One of the best-selling books of the 1850's was Ten Nights in a Barroom and What I Sate There. Thousands of people read this book or saw the play based on it. The temperance leaders' greatest succe^lj however, was the enactment of state laws! prohibiting the sale of liquor except forj medicinal purposes. The first such law wash adopted in Maine in 1846; within a few years thirteen states, most of them in the North and West, had experimented with prohibition laws./ But prohibition remained a subject of debate. Some protest came from immigrants who resented government: interference with their drinking customs. Also, opponents of prohibition pointed out that temperance laws were difficult to enforce and that it was unwise to pass laws which would be violated. Women secure new rights. During the i Jacksonian Era, several academies and a few colleges, mostly in the North and West, had opened educational opportunities to women. Once educated, women asked for new rights and still other opportunities. A j few remarkable women emerged as leaders of this campaign. In 1848, I.ucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton organized the first women's rights convention in Seneca Falls, New York. The delegates adopted a Declaration of Sentiments, modeled on the Declaration of Independence. This outspoken document criticized men for their | tyranny over the opposite sex and demanded political, educational, and social equality for women. This outfit was called the 'bloomer" costume after Amelia Bloomer, who first described it in her crusading magazine. The public outcry against "Bloomerism" was so great, however, that the ladies soon gave it up. f These early feminists endured much ridicule and even hostility. Indeed, a long and unpopular campaign lay ahead for advocates of women's rights. Yet even in the 1850's they had the public support of such H prominent men as the author Ralph Waldo Emerson, the newspaper editor Horace | Greeley, and William Lloyd Garrison, the jjholitionist. The Negro meets obstacles in the North. A group of people who suffered even greater discrimination than women were the free Negroes living in the North And West By 1860 only five states (Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Rhode Island) permitted Negroes do vote. Almost everywhere in the free states Negroes met discrimination in housing, jobs, schools, churches, and transportation. The legislatures of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois actually prohibited Negroes from settling in those states. Ohio removed this ban in 1849; and a few years later Massachusetts forbade school segregation. But Negroes north of the Mason and Dixon line did not have rights or opportunities equal to those of white citizens. Moreover, whites who interested themselves in the Negro's plight devoted their efforts chiefly to the abolitionist cause. The antislavery movement spreads. As you read in Chapter 12, few Northerners joined abolition societies in the 1830's. In fact, abolitionists of that period encountered much opposition in the North. But during the 1840's and '50's the antislavery movement grew rapidly. As spokesmen for the South became more unyielding in their defense of slavery, large numbers of north- The abolition ol slavery in northern states did ?ut on end to discrimination. Elizabeth Blackwell received a medical degree in 1849, thus becoming the first licensed woman doctor in this country. In the 1850's, she and her sister opened a hospital for women in New York. era and western speakers, ministers, writers and organizers joined the cause of abolition. In the free states many people came to feel that slavery was morally wrong. They wanted Congress to ban slavery in federal territories and explore ways of ending it in the South. The Gag Rule boomerangs. Abolitionist efforts seemed to thrive on opposition. This was demonstrated by the "Gag Ride" struggle in the House of Representatives. For several years the abolition societies had been sending antislavery petitions to Congress. Southern congressmen became so annoyed by these petitions that they sought to block consideration of them in the House of Representatives, fin 1836 the House adopted a resolution which prevented discussion of any antislavery petition. Former President John Quincy Adams, serving as a congressman from Massachusetts, opposed this "Gag Rule." Though not an abolitionist,3 he realized that the resolution violated the constitutional right of citizens to petition Congress, fAfter eight years of 3 Adams opposed slavery but, like many Americans, believed it would have to be eliminated gradually. Most abolitionists called for the immediate freeing of all slaves. 309 This violotion ol c.vil rights led fo on not made a secret agreement with the railroads, by which the railroads would sharply increase freight rates on oil for all refiners except the South Improvement Company, Furthermore, this company would receive rebates on the increased rates paid by its competitors-. When news of this deal leaked out, the Pennsylvania legislature canceled the charter of the South Improvement Company. But Standard Oil was so powerful that it pressured the railroads into paying rebates anyway. Rockefeller found still other ways to dominate the oil industry. Rather than pay for the services of the independent pipeline companies. Rockefeller built his own pipe lines. This move drove most of the independent pipe-line firms into bankruptcy. Standard also developed a nation-wide marketing system. An extensive network of sales offices sent Rockefeller regular reports about rival firms that were underselling Standard products. These competitors were warned to withdraw from the race. If they refused. Rockefeller cut his prices until the opponent agreed to sell out. Standard could afford to take heavy losses in one area by raising its prices in another. Within fifteen years after lie entered the industry. Rockefeller controlled 95 per cent of the country's oil refineries. Though bitterly criticized in his time by competitors and others, Rockefeller made important contributions to the nation's economic growth. lie found an oil industry composed of many small producers, few of which were efficiently organized. He left an industry of massive proportions, able to produce on a large scale and meet the ever-increasing demand for oil. Other industries develop. New processes and business methods affected many other industries besides oil and steel. Dairy farmers were aided by new milking ma- I'rom a crude well drilled in Titusville, Pennsylvania, by Edwin Drake (in top hat in picture at left above) lias developed AtncricOs huge oil industry. Modern refining plant work around the clock to coned crude oil into useful products. One of meil products, gasoline, makes possible transportO' tion by automobile and truck (left). chines and cream separators. Gail Borden, founder of the Borden Milk Company, had worked out a process for producing condensed milk in the 1850's. After the Civil War, he built a plant in Texas and began large-scale production. New methods also revolutionized the flour milling industry. When the farmers on the plains began growing hard winter wheat in the 1870's, the millers had to develop new processes for grinding this grain. They found that steel rollers did a better job than the old millstones and produced a finer grade of flour. One of the biggest operators in the Minneapolis milling industry was Charles A. Pillsbury. Like Carnegie and Rockefeller, he was quick to utilize new improvements in his field. Meat packing in the prewar days involved shipping hogs and cattle to Cincinnati or Chicago. There the animals were slaughtered and the meat salted down and packed in barrels for shipment to eastern markets. Sometimes animals were shipped all the way to the East Coast and butchered in local markets. The pattern of meat packing changed with the introduction of the refrigerator car. The cattlemen often did their own slaughtering and shipped the carcasses to Chicago in refrigerator cars. Some meat packing was done in Omaha and Kansas City, but the companies of Gustavos Swift and Philip Armour made Chicago the undisputed meat-packing center of the country. Their plants were equipped with conveyor belts and a wide variety of machines that cut, dressed, and packed tin1 Pork and Reef. Moreover, the packers found uses for every possible by-product. Why did oil become big business? What methods were used by Rockefeller and his associates to gain control of the oil industry? Whot important changes were mode In flour milling? In meat packing? Many Factors Aid I ndlist rial Expansion Technology and invention spur industrial growth. What were the reasons for this country's remarkable industrial expansion in the late nineteenth century? One vital factor was the advance of technology — the practical application of science to in-^ dustry. Advances in technology resulted in the invention or perfection of all sorts of machines, labor-saving devices, and scientific processes. The large-scale manufacture of steel, upon which the industrial age rests, would have been impossible without the new technology. Startling proof of the widespread interest in technology is found in the records of the United States Patent Office. From its establishment in 1790 up to 1860, the Patent Office granted only 36,000 patents. But in the next thirty years, it issued 4-10,000. Electricity provides light and power. In the later 1800's, technology gave us a new and important form of power — electricity. In 1879 Thomas A. Edison had perfected an electric light bulb. Three years later he built a power station in New York- City that provided electric current to 85 buildings. Edison's company soon merged with the General Electric Company. A major rival was the Westinghouse Electric Company, founded by George Westinghouse, inventor of the air brake (page 445). The Westinghouse Company developed generators and transformers for alternating current. This ultimately proved far more efficient than direct current, which Edison had originally used. The use of electric power began to change the face of American cities. Office buildings and expensive homes installed electric lights. The electric arc lamp, developed in the 1870's, eventually replaced gas street lights. By making more efficient elevators possible, electric power prepared the way for the skyscraper. Electric trolley cars transformed urban transportation. ^ Technology builds on the findings of pure science. •lh century. Reckless explciitotion of resource Despite the startling changes which electricity brought about in the late ISOO's, however, its full impact was not felt until the twentieth century. Coal, rather than electricity, provided the power for railroads and fed the steam engines in the factories of the nineteenth century. In fact, coal was the country's major source of power from the Civil War to the First World War. Resources are plentiful. An obvious factor contributing to the growth of industry was the country's abundant resources. During this period the steel industry found all the coal and iron ore it needed within - the United States; likewise, the oil industry found vast resources of crude petroleum. The farmers of the Great Plains provided quantities of grain to keep the millers busy. Ranchers raised herds of cattle to supply the meat-packing firms. Forests yielded wood for furniture factories and* paper mills. The railroads, of course, provided the necessary transportation, carrying farm products and raw materials to processing and manufacturing plants, and distributing the finished goods to markets all over the country. Labor is available. The growing number of workers also contributed to the country's industrial expansion. The population of the United States more than doubled between 1860 and 1900, increasing from 31 million to 76 million. Part of this increase came from the arrival of some 14 million immigrants. Many of these new Americans took factory jobs in the cities where they disembarked or in other industrial centers. In addition, thousands of Americans left small farms in the eastern Industry owes much to the brilliant mimls of the inventors pictured here, all of whom pioneered in electricity. Nikola Tesla (just above) invented the alternating current motor. Many of his pah tits were purchased by George Westinghouse (top left), who used them in organizing his electric company. Thomas Edison, probably the most famous inventor of all, is shown at top right with his phonograph. The research of Charles Steinmetz (right) advanced scientific knowledge of electricity anti led to many practical improvements. Tesla and Steinmel; both immigrated to this country from Europe. In Thousands Cl s 1850-1960 This chart features patents issued by the United States Patent Office from 1H50 to 1900. The rapid increase in the number of inventions reflects advances in technology. (By 1970 the number of patents granted annually had nearly tripled since 1900.) 40 4 20 4 1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 and midwestern states to go to the cities. By 1900 more than 60 per cent of American workers had non-agricultural jobs. Business develops new forms of organization. In the years following the Civil War, business leaders continued their search for more effective forms of business organization. Well before the war, many businesses had become corporations (page 259). A corporation received a charter from a state legislature, entitling it to conduct a certain kind of business. The corporation could raise capital by selling shares of stock (certificates of ownership). Stockholders received their share of the corporation's profits in the form of dividends, and they had the right to elect directors of the corporation. The corporation had definite advantages over a partnership or proprietorship. It could raise the large amounts of capital needed to build industrial plants (and to buy machinery and raw materials. Moreover, the financial risks were divided among a large number of people, and the corporation was not affected by the death °f individual stockholders. During the 1870's many corporations formed pools in order to reduce competition, Pooling meant that corporations in the same line of business would agree to produce only a certain amount of goods and sdl to only a certain part of the market. For example, when the cordage manufacturers produced more rope and twine than the market could absorb, they formed a pool to control output and divide up the market. Some railroads formed pools, with the result that passengers and shippers had to pay higher rates. In the late 1880's the federal government prohibited railroad pools (page 496), but by that time the practice was already on the decline. Since a pool was a "gentlemen's agreement" and had no legal standing, its members often violated the agreement and tried to capture more than their share of the market. Trusts prove more effective than pools. In the 1880's businessmen turned to still another kind of organization. The trust was a legal combination of corporations. Enough shares of stock in each of the associated companies were turned over to a single board of trustees to give it control over the combined organization. In return, the stockholders received trust certificates which entitled them to a share of the trust's profits. Management of the various corporations, however, rested in the hands of the trustees. The first trust was organized by John D. Rockefeller and his business associates. In 1882 the controlling shares of stock in a number of separate oil companies were turned over to a board of trustees, thus forming the Standard Oil trust. Ike corporation in mony ways resembled the joint-stock company of colonial days. The United States Continues to Attract Immigrants Immigration increases. As you read in Chapter 21, the population of the United States jumped from 31 million in 1860 to 76 million by 1900. This growth resulted partly from a high birth rate and partly from increasing immigration. About 14 million foreigners came to American shores during this period (see chart, page 470). Though the number appears large in comparison with the 5 million who came to America between 1820 and 1860, the proportion of immigrants to the total population remained about the same — approximately 13 per cent. In other words, the nation's birth rate kept pace with the swelling tide of newcomers. Reasons for immigration are unchanged. The motives of the immigrants who came to this country after 1865 were much the same as those of people who had come earlier. To them, this country was the "promised land" where they hoped to live a better life and give their children greater opportunities. They learned about these possibilities from relatives or friends who had already settled in the United States. Sometimes one exciting letter from America would persuade an entire village of people to leave their European homeland. Prospective immigrants also obtained information from American railroad agents offering western land at attractive prices. 1. The United States continues to attract immigrants. 2. Crowded cities hove many problems. 3. Workingmen organize national unions. 4. Workers strike, and management fights back. 5. Reformers try to help the underprivileged. and from spokesmen for American industries that needed factory workers. Agents for steamship lines competing for business also promoted immigration. Opportunities in the United States seemed all the more inviting because of conditions in Europe. Many European countries were overpopulated. Both in farming areas and in cities, times were hard and jobs were scarce. Political oppression and religious persecution also caused some people to leave Europe. Still other reasons for leaving were heavy taxes and compulsory military service. Many immigrants come from northern and western Europe. For about 25 years after the Civil War the majority of immigrants continued to come from northern and western Europe. Economic conditions in Ireland, for example, were still hard, though not as bad as during the famine years of the 1840's. Consequently many Irishmen joined friends and relatives in the United States. So also did large numbers of Welsh. Scottish, and English people. About half of the British immigrants were skilled workers, a much larger proportion than in any other group. They generally received higher wages than other newcomers and were also quick to join labor unions. Many of the German and Scandinavian immigrants of the postwar years were country folk. Some of them settled on farms in the West, but many took unskilled jobs in mines, factories, and meat-packing and flour-milling plants. These newcomers, along with the Irish postwar immigrants, filled the demand for unskilled manual labor. By the mid-1890's, however, many of the Irish, German, and Scandinavian immigrants had acquired skills and enough knowledge of American ways to find better jobs. By this time, moreover, economic conditions in northern and western Europe had improved. Though people continued t° come to the United States from Ireland, Great Britain, Scandinavia, and Germany, the rate of immigration from these countries declined toward the end of the century. Immigration from southern and eastern Europe increases. Pages 466-467 deal with one city — Pittsburgh — in particular. The map on page 468 shows the leading metropolitan centers in 1970. The three waps on this pane show the size anil location of leading cities at three different dates. In 1790 our most populous urban centers lay along the Atlantic roast. They included plaees that were to become great cities and also several .Vcu' England seaports. Half a century later, the leading cities were larger and more scattered. Canals and steamboats hail encouraged the growth of cities on inland waterways. By 1900, the growth of industry, increased immigration, and the spread of railroads had helped create the great urban centers of Chicago and San Francisco. An SMS A is a large metropolitan area which acts as a single economic and social unit. The inset on the map of Pittsburgh (page 466) indicates the extent of that city's SMSA. Each of the urban centers aimve was an SMSA with over one million people in 1970. Below arc "growth profiles" of five American cities. As the key indicates, each column shows the growth between 1940 and I960 of the core city (dark color), the suburban area (dashed line), and the metropolitan area as a whole (entire column). Percentage figures indicate the increase or decrease of the core city and of the metropolitan area. Note that each metropolitan area grew larger. But trends in core and suburban areas have not followed a uniform pattern. K M. Chapin, Jr nineteenth century, emigration from Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia, and Turkey had been prohibited by the governments of those countries. But in the 1870's laws were relaxed, enabling thousands of people to leave for the United States. People from Poland and the Balkan countries also joined the growing numbers who sought a better life across the ocean. Most of these immigrants were peasants, who had little chance of making a good living in their homelands. Many people left Russia to escape political and religious persecution. Anti-Jewish riots and harsh laws imposing restrictions on where they could live and what work they could do, caused large numbers of Jews to (lee from Russia. Joining the Jewish refugees from Russia were Poles, Ukrainians, Lithuanians, and Finns. During the 1870's immigration from southern and eastern Europe accounted for less than 5 per cent of the total number of newcomers to the United States. By the mid-1890's, however, half of the total number of immigrants came from these parts of Europe. And in the early 1900's the flow of people from southern and eastern Europe swelled to almost 75 per cent of the immigration tide. The newer immigrants settle in cities. Few of these later immigrants took up farming in the United States. The best land in the West had already been claimed, and they lacked the money to travel west and buy land anyway. Most of them, therefore, settled in the urban centers of the Northeast, although a large number traveled by rail to Chicago. The new immigrants took jobs in factories, meat-packing plants, the garment industry, mines and lumber camps, and on construction projects. By 1910 foreign-born workers were filling more than half of the jobs in Amcri- *32 industry, the willingness of workers from southern and eastern Europe to take fhe lower-paid, less-skilled positions enabled ^earlier immigrants to move into better jobs. In the Northeast, Maine and Vermont Thii upward mobility at o largo Immigrant group C also failed to attract immigrants. These states offered few factory jobs and little fertile land available for sale. Some Americans favor restriction of immigration. The raising of the Statue of Liberty on an island in New York harbor came at an appropriate time — the inid- 1880's. Great numbers of immigrants were responding to the invitation inscribed on the Statue's base: Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, . . . Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me, 1 lift my lamp beside the golden doorl Yet, at this very time, some Americans were demanding that immigration be restricted. These people believed that more immigrants were being admitted than could be absorbed into American life. To some native-born Americans, the immigrants' religious practices, social customs, speech, and clothing seemed too foreign. They also accused the immigrants of being clannish and of refusing to learn English. This kind of criticism was especially directed at the immigrants from southern and eastern Europe, whose ways seemed much stranger than those of the earlier immigrants. Moreover, the immigrants were blamed for crowded conditions in the cities and for increases in crime, disease, and graft in city governments. Sonic Americans feared that the immigrants held dangerous political views. One businessman charged: "The [immi- grant] leaders boldly proclaim that they come here not to enjoy the blessings of our liberty and to sustain our institutions but to destroy our government, cut our throats, and divide our property." Labor union leaders likewise expressed some concern about immigration. They feared that the newcomers, by working for low wages, would cause union members to lose their jobs. They also suspected that employers would use immigrants to break strikes. In the 1890's some unions passed resolutions favoring the restriction of immigration. But foreign-born members of the unions opposed such resolutions. b" IlluiOOtpd by th* Irlib In Ma**ocliu*"tti. tion, the mayor and council hired many city workers, made appointments to boards and commissions, and sometimes named city court judges. Before 1860, the responsibilities of city government were relatively light. Capable persons could serve on city councils while keeping their regular jobs. J But in the later 1800's, the problems of governing the expanding cities became much more complex. Additional housing was desperately needed. Sanitary facilities — sewage disposal, water supply, and garbage collection — proved inadequate. Police and fire departments needed reorganization and expansion. Overwhelmed by the size of these problems, many capable men hesitated to seek office in city governments. Thus, the way was open for less scrupulous "1105x05" to take over. The same sort of corruption that had plagued New York under Boss Tweed (page 401) took root in other cities. In the 1880's ait English visitor, James Bryce, called city government "the one conspicuous failure in the United States." City bosses court the immigrant vote. Many Americans laid the blame for bad city government on city bosses and immigrant voters, Newcomers to the crowded cities, particularly the immigrants, often found that the only "official" interested in their problems was the local political boss. He helped them find living quarters and jobs; and if they tangled with the law, he got them out of jail. During hard times he brought food to their families. In return, he expected the immigrants' votes.. But while the boss got most of his votes from the immigrants, he often received financial support from native-born Americans who wanted favors from the city council. The boss instructed his councilmen to grant contracts and other favors to men willing to finance the political machine. Thus, corruption was hardly a monopoly of the immigrants, Philadelphia remained "corrupt and contented" tmder native-born political bosses for nearly fifty years. Some immigrants enter politics. Many political bosses of the late 1800's were themselves immigrants or the sons of immigrants. It is easy to understand why they were attracted to politics. Few of them had either the education or the money to build a career in business or the professions. But jn politics they had an opportunity to advance Out of the immigrant ranks came not only ward bosses but capable and honest politicians as well. German and Irish immigrants were among the first newcomers to win public office. In many midwestem cities Germans held seats on tire city councils, and some were elected mayors. German-born John Peter Altgeld was elected governor of Illinois in 1S92. Boston had several Irish mayors, including John F. Fitzgerald, whose grandson, John F. Kennedy, became President in 1961. By the end of the century officeholders of German and Irish background were familiar figures in city, state, and even national politics. Not until the twentieth century, however, did immigrants from southern and eastern Europe have enough power to win political office. Why did cities grow rapidly after the. Civil War? Why did slums develop? How were city services inadequate? 2. Why were city bosses interested in immigrants? Why did immigrants enter politics? Workingmen Organize National Unions Industrialization changes the worker'* role. The rapid industrial growth of the late LSOO's not only created thousands of new jobs but also made available many new goods and services. As a result of these changes, the American standard of living improved. Also, machines took over many backbreaking and dangerous operation* formerly performed by workers. At the same time, however, industrialization had an unwelcome effect on the worker's role- Increasingly he became a mere cog in 11 huge industrial wheel. The value of a The foct thot the pet copito cost of municipal services increases with population Is one reason f°r the financial plight of our largest cities. worked ten or twelve hours a day, often for wages so low that they could not save for old age and hard times. When depressions came, they lost their jobs and suffered hardship. Supposedly industrial workers were free to bargain with employers for better wages, hours, and factory conditions. But actually they were at a great disadvantage. The manager of a large factory had no reason to listen to the complaints of an individual employee. As Theodore Roosevelt later expressed it, there was a crass inequality in the bargaining relation between the employer and the individual employee standing alone. [For example] the worker's skill, and the job security that it had given him, began to diminish. The skilled shoemaker, for example, found little satisfaction in operating a machine that punched eyelets in thousands of pairs of shoes every day. Moreover, a man who operated such a machine for ten years had little more skill than a newly hired worker. Machinery, not labor, now became the most important factor in industrial planning. Three notable Americans of the late 1800's began life in this country as immigrants. German-born John Peter Alt- geld (right) became the first Democratic governor of Illinois and uon fame for his courageous stand on reform issues. Jacob Riis (above), born in Denmark, became a police reporter in New York City. His accounts of slum conditions aroused Americans to the need for reform. Labor in the late 1800's recognized Samuel Campers (right) as its leader. Compcrs arrived from England as a young boy and became an apprentice cigarmaker. He organized the AFL and served as its president for many years. Millions of People This chart shows immigration up to 1900 with emphasis on the years 1871-1900. Note the rapid increase in the number of immigrants. The chart on page 655 will trace the rise and fall of immigration up to the present. As in (lie 18-10's and '50's (page 307), religions prejudice was another reason for anti-immigrant feeling. Many Germans and Poles, and almost all of the Irish and Italian immigrants, were Catholic. Some people declared that Catholics would soon outnumber Protestants. It was even rumored that the Pope had plans to convert all Americans to Catholicism. Religious hostility was also aimed at the Jewish immigrants from eastern Europe. Though Jews had lived in this country from its earliest days, they did not arrive in large numbers until the late 1800's. Because their customs were unfamiliar to many native-born Americans, the Jews encountered much prejudice in the new country. Chinese immigration is restricted. Along with the hostility toward immigrants in the East, there was growing concern about Chinese immigration to the West Coast states. During the 1860's Americans in the West had welcomed the arrival of Chinese "coolies" (workers) because of a shortage of labor. A treaty with China in 1868 confirmed the right of the Chinese to come to the United States in unlimited numbers. Before long, however, American workers were finding that the coolies offered unwelcome competition. Demands for the restriction of Chinese immigration began to be heard. In 1882 Congress passed a bill that cut off all immigration from China for ten years. This restriction on Chinese immigration was extended in 1892 and then extended indefinitely in 1902, It marked a sharp reversal in this country's historic policy of admitting all newcomers without distinction as to place of birth. Congress passes other restrictive measures. Meanwhile, eastern port cities were demanding a different kind of immigration law. These cities complained about the burden of supporting immigrants who were paupers, convicts, or insane. New York City threatened to close down its immigration depot unless Congress acted. This pressure caused Congress in 1882 to pass an act which excluded all such immigrants. The same law imposed a head tax of 50 cents (to be paid by the carrier) on every alien passenger, and required steamship companies to take back to their homelands any persons who were not admitted. In 1891 another law excluded persons suffering from contagious diseases. Two other types of objections to unlimited immigration arose. First, labor groups objected to the practice of bringing immigrants into the United States under a contract to work for a specific employer. In 1885 Congress passed a law prohibiting contract labor. Second, many people thought immigrants should be required to pass literacy tests, proving that they could read and write. Such a bill passed Congress in 1896 but was vetoed by President Grover Cleveland. lie insisted that it was better to admit a hundred thousand immigrants who, though unable to read and write, seek among us a home and opportunity to work, than to admit one of those unruly agitators and enemies of governmental control who cannot only read and write, but delight in arousing by inflammatory speech the illiterate and peacefully inclined to discontent and tumult- With the exception of the Chinese restriction measure, these early immigration laws were not aimed at newcomers from any particular country. Probably many Americans hoped that the laws would reduce the number of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. But our European immigration policy remained basically unchanged until the 1920's (page 655). Why did immigration increase after the Civil War? Why did more Immigrants come from eastern and southern Europe after about 1890? Why did these immigrants settle in cities? 2. Why did some Americans come to favor restriction of immigration? What restrictive measures were enacted? Crowded Cities Have Many Problems Cities grow rapidly. As we have seen, the expansion of American industry in the years following the Civil War caused cities to grow rapidly. In or near the urban centers were found the steel mills, meat-pack- ing and Hour-milling plants, oil refineries, a,id machine-tool and clothing factories. Those cities grew most rapidly which provided the industries with adequate transportation facilities. Immigrants arriving at an ever-increas- ing rate added to the city populations. At the same time, the job opportunities offered V expanding industry attracted large num- bcrs of native-born people from the coun- frvside. This was particularly true in the states east of the Mississippi River, where small farms could no longer compete with the mechanized farms of the Plains states. From 1870 to 1900 the number of Americans living in cities of 100,000 or more increased from four million to fourteen million. During the same thirty years, three of the country's cities — New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia — acquired populations of more than a million people. Chicago enjoyed the most spectacular growth of any American city. Only a muddy trading post in the 1830's, it had become by 1860 an important rail center with a population of 100,000. Industrialization and further railroad expansion continued to boost the city's population. By 1900, Chicago bad 1,700,000 inhabitants and was second only to New York City in size. New York and Brooklyn (they were consolidated in 1898) had over 3,000,000 people by the end of the century; Philadelphia had 1,300,000. Also startling was the growth of the iron and steel towns of Pittsburgh and Birmingham, and of Minneapolis as a flour-milling and lumber center. In the West, Denver? Seattle, San Francisco, and Los Angeles grew rapidly. Many immigrants live in slums. Industrial expansion and the growth of urban populations changed the appearance of American cities. Small factories went up on vacant lots, while lofts and basements of existing buildings housed workrooms for cigar rollers, paper-box makers, and garment workers. People who had owned single-family homes in the core of the city moved to middle-class neighborhoods on the edges of the city or to the suburbs.1 The homes they left were subdivided into small apartments for immigrants. The need for city housing became so great that landlords began to build tenement (multiple-dwelling) buildings. In Philadelphia and Boston large numbers of two- and three-story frame tenements went up. Builders in New York preferred four- to six-story brick buildings with four apartments on each floor. In many instances the only running water and sanitary facilities were located outside the building at the back of the lot. In the 1890's the so-called "dumbbell tenement" began to appear in New York. Eight stories high, it packed 32 families into cramped quarters. A city 1 For the growth of the middle-class suburbs see Chapter 23 (page 507). In the twentieth century the growth of Los Angeles has been spectacular, Can -.ludonls identify ili" census which showed the greatest numerical over the previous one? The population of the United States almost doubled between 1870 and 1000. An increasing proportion of Americans lived in urban areas. block of these tenements conlcl house some 1200 families. Slum areas where thousands of poor people huddled in squalid conditions sprang up in most large cities. Since Chicago could expand to the west, its tenements were never as high or as closely crowded together as those in New York. But ramshackle wooden structures and alley shacks blighted the entire western section of Chicago. In 1890 Jacob Riis began to draw the nation's attention to the misery of the slums. This young Danish immigrant had become a newspaper reporter covering New York's immigrant neighborhoods. His articles in the New York Sun and his book How the Other Half Lives aroused the indignation of many Americans. Here is Riis' description of one New York slum building: The hall is dark and you might stumble over the children pitching pennies back there. Not that it would hurt them; kicks and cuffs are their daily diet. . . . All the fresh air that ever enters these stairs comes from the hall- door that is forever slamming and from the windows of dark bedrooms. . . . The sinks are in the hallway, that all the tenants may have access — and all he poisoned alike by their summer stenches. Hear the pump squeak? It is the lullaby of tenement house babes. In summer, when a thousand thirsty throats pant for a cooling drink in this block, it is worked in vain. But the saloon, whose open door you passed in the hall, is always there. The smell of it has followed you up, Here is a door. Listen! That short, hacking cough, that tiny, helpless wail — what do they mean? They mean that the soiled bow of white you saw on the door downstairs will have another story to tell — oh! a sadly familiar story — before the day is at an etnl. The child is living with measles. With half a chance it might have lived, but it had none. City services are inadequate. City governments paid little attention to the spread of the slums in the lS8()'s and 1890s. Indeed, few services were provided for the poorer sections of any city. Although most of New York's streets were paved by 1880, streets in the slums were notoriously neglected. The west side of Chicago was a quagmire of mud and rubbish. There were few paved streets and almost no sidewalks in the slum districts. When the railroads built into Chicago, the city allowed tracks to be laid at street level. As a result, steam engines frequently crashed into horse-drawn vehicles. City governments were little concerned with sanitation. Few slum areas had regular garbage collections, for example. ln Chicago huge garbage containers on the street corners were seldom emptied and were infested by rats. Though Chicago' drew its water supply from Lake Michigan- the city's refuse was dumped into the sanity body of water. Few cities had ordinances regulating the sale of food. Hence dealer* The pollution of rivers ond loket continues to be o inojor probl"m To document his reports, Jacob Riis photofpaphi d the people who lived and worked in the slums. The scene at right shows a New York street crowded with peddlers and buyers, horse cars, and children. Many immigrants of this period felt lucky to get a job in a "sweatshop," working long hours for low wages. The garment workers below must hare been surprised that a newspaper reporter wanted to photograph them. Immigrant children often worked because their parents' wages wire too meager to feed and clothe an entire family. Rut most of these children got more schooling than their parents had had. At lower right, students in an industrial school salute the flag. Were able to sell spoiled food and contaminated milk to the unwary public. As a result of such conditions, most large cities suffered frequent epidemics of typhoid fever and other diseases. Hardly any parks or playgrounds bright. ened the urban slums. Children played on die streets, in the alleys, and in the dark hallways of the tenements. Though cities Were beginning to install better street lighting in some areas, the slum neighborhoods Were seldom adequately lighted at night. Jacob Riis pointed this out as one reason f°r the high crime rate in congested city areas. Riis discovered alleys in New York h* r*ctr"t yeati faderal program* Unities of undarpriviloged inhabited by gangs of vicious thieves who frightened off even the police. Municipal governments fail to cope with city problems. In general, city governments were unprepared to handle the problems that resulted from the rapid increase of population. Most American cities were governed by a mayor and a city council made up of aldermen elected from the various districts or wards. The mayor and council had a great deal of power. They determined how the city revenues would be spent; what buildings would be constructed; which streets repaired; and who would get the contracts for doing these jobs. In addi- hove sought to improve children ond youth. the physical fitness ond educationol oppor* crowding and poor government of the cities, and the hitter struggle between labor and management. Reformers organize. Some Americans formed organizations to seek solutions to these problems. The National Civic Federation, for example, sought to improve relations between employers and employees. Its president was a prominent businessman, Mark Hanna, and its vice- president was Samuel Gompers. Another organization, the National Municipal League, helped raise the standards of city government. Builder of Public Parks During the Gilded Age the country's cities came to appreciate the importance of public parks, thanks in large part to the first "land- scape architect," Frederick Law Olmsted. In the 1850's New York responded to the pleas of William Cullen Bryant for a city park. Olmsted's plans for Central Park won a contest in 1858, and for the next decade he supervised the park's development. Acres of swamp and pasture were transformed into lakes, woods, and meadows, with attractive paths for pedestrians and sunken roads for vehicles. Olmsted followed this achievement with the creation of many other city parks. He also landscaped the Capitol grounds in Washington, D. C. industrial relations. The iMdies Home Journal campaigned for cleaner cities more parks and playgrounds, and regulation of the sale of food and medicine. Improvements are made in the cities. Widespread publicity, aroused citizens, and pressure from reform groups forced the cities to do something about their sloppy housekeeping. Streets were paved and kept cleaner, and sidewalks were added in many neighborhoods. Improved street lighting, and larger, better-disciplined police forces helped to reduce crime. Moreover, cities began to build sewage plants and to provide safe water supplies. The cities also adopted ordinances to regulate the sale of food, milk, and medicine, though enforcements was often lax. Many towns and cities began to set aside land for parks. By the end of the century most city governments were also attempting to regulate multiple dwellings. City regulations required landlords to install fire escapes, plumbing, and adequate lighting. The New York legislature banned the construe tion of "dumbbell" tenements and required all new apartment buildings to provide light, air, and open space for the tenants. Churches show an interest in urban problems. By the 1890's many Protestant churches were beginning to take an interest in the problems of the cities. Some Protestant ministers were trained to apply Christian principles to all areas of life — including government, industrial relations, and social and economic problems. Preaching a message known as the Social Gospet, these ministers challenged the "survival of the fittest" theory that was used to justify selfish competition (page 458), They insisted that this principle should not be applied to human beings. Moreover, they argued, people should be helped to overcome handicaps imposed by outside forces — the immigrants' lack of knowledge of j English, for example. By receiving such assistance, less fortunate people would become better able to adjust to life. The "Social Gospel" ministers urged their parishioners to practice the principles of Christianity by helping underprivileged "I people. Churches in the heart of many cities began to offer a full schedule of clubs^ J In recent year, mlnl.t.r. of oil faith, hove been aetlv. In th. civil right, m,v.meitfl For more than forty years, Jane Addams directed the work of Hull House (top right, in 1963). Her affection for children (right) touched thousands of lives. Another pioneer social worker, Lillian Wald (above left), originated the idea of public health nursing while helping poor immigrant families in New York City. In 1892 she founded the Henry Street Settlement. classes, and playground activities. For his efforts to end the Russo-Japanese War, Roosevelt was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. But his role in the negotiations angered many Japanese. They felt that Roosevelt had blocked their effort to obtain ft J- badly needed sum of money. I ^§j Relations between Japan and the United States are troubled. Japanese resentment against the United States was further inflamed by the treatment of Oriental immigrants on our West Coast. As we saw in Chapter 22, prejudice against Asians had resulted in the exclusion of Chinese immigrants during the late 1800s|^ Jopon hod hoped r0 eoll.ct o heavy indemnify from Hordly an example of the "open door." jfow politicians and labor leaders were depending a ban on Japanese immigration, and western state legislatures were passing [gWs discriminating against Japanese already in the United States. The situation came to a head in 1906, when the San Francisco school board ordered all Japanese children to attend a separate school. Newspapers in Japan called this a national insult and demanded action from Roosevelt. The President had no authority over San Francisco's schools, but he did exert pressure on the school board to reverse its decision. The segregation order was finally revoked when Roosevelt promised to do something about Japanese immigration. During 1907-1908 the two countries reached an understanding, which came to be called the Gentlemen's Agreement. In return for the lifting of the school segregation order, the Japanese government agreed not to issue passports to Japanese laliorcrs wanting to enter the United States.2 The Gentlemen's Agreement effectively curbed Japanese immigration, but it did not put an end to state laws discriminating against Orientals. This situation was greatly resented in Japan, where the people assumed that all Americans regarded them as inferior. But few Japanese understood that the states had powers with which the federal government could not Interfere. Roosevelt sends the fleet around the world. To demonstrate American naval power, and thus make it easier to settle disagreements with Japan, President Roosevelt decided to send an American fleet on a cruise around the world. Although Congress at first refused to make an appropriation for this purpose, sufficient nioney was available to send the fleet to San Francisco. When the President declared it would stay there until Congress voted more funds. Congress gave way. The ships stopped at South American ports. " An imniiuratinu act in 1907 denied admission •° all Japanese who did not possess proper pass- P°rts. This law was interpreted to exelnde Japa- r-jtev who came from (island possessions) of the United States or from any country other than aPan. 3 . Howe Hawaii, New Zealand, Australia, the Philippines, China, and Japan. In Yokohama the Japanese people welcomed the American sailors with enthusiasm. After a trip through the Suez Canal and across the Atlantic, the fleet returned to the United States. It arrived on February 22, 1909 — just in time to celebrate Washington's birthday. President Roosevelt proudly announced that sending the fleet around the world was "the most important service that 1 rendered to peace." The Root-Takahira Agreement is signed. While the fleet was on its way, Japan and the United States signed the Root-Takahira Agreement (1908). In an exchange of notes, the two countries stated their desire to "encourage the free arid peaceful development of their commerce" and agreed to maintain the existing situation in the Pacific area. This implied Japanese recognition of American sovereignty in the Philippines and [American acknowledgment of [apanese influence in Man-. chnriaJand control of Korea. The agreement also provided that the two powers would respect the independence of China and support the Open Door. Finally, they agreed to consult with each other in the event of any threat to existing conditions in the areas concerned. Taft promotes "dollar diplomacy." Theodore Roosevelt's successor, President Taft, applied another policy in the Far Fast. His Secretary of State, Philander C. Knox, had been a corporation lawyer having close ties with business interests. Knox and Taft favored an American foreign policy which would encourage American trade and investments in the Far East and Latin America. Such economic developments, they believed, would promote political and economic stability in these areas. The use of diplomatic influence to protect and advance American financial and commercial interests abroad became known as dollar diplomacy. President Taft defended it as a "most useful" policy which would "bene- fit .. . [all] countries concerned." In the Far East, Secretary Knox justified "dollar diplomacy" on the grounds that the investment of American money in China that the new, Democratic administration might discontinue the policies of Roosevelt and Taft. Wilson at first denounces "dollar di- plomacy." Roads were built and sanitary conditions were improved. (3) Meanwhile, Wilson expanded the United States' protectorate over the Dominican Republic. In 1916 American marines were landed in that country to ng down political disturbances. For the nev six years an American military government ruled the Dominican Republic. There, in Haiti, American occupation led to th( construction of roads, bridges, and wharves. Schools were built and sanitary conditiom were improved. But to the people of Haiti and the Dominican Republic, these benefits did not compensate for their loss of independence. (4) In 1916 American influence in tin Caribbean was further extended by purchase of the Danish West Indies (now called the Virgin Islands) for 25 million dollars. These islands, located at the entrance to the Caribbean, were considered vital to the defense of the Panama Canal. The Virgin Islands were administered by a governor appointed by the President. Ten years later the inhabitants were made citizens of the United States, but they did not secure a legislative assembly until 1936. Mexico attracts United States investments. Relations with Mexico proved the most troublesome of Latin American affairs during Wilson's administration. Under the dictatorial rule of Porfirio Diaz (r/ce'ahs), Mexico had the outward appearance of a well-knit federal state. Beneath the surface, however, lay ignorance and superstition, racial and class hatred, and economic discontent. Most of Mexico's land was owned by the members of a small privileged upper class, while nine out of ten Mexicans were landless peons who lived almost like serfs. Since Diaz had turned the rich natural resources of the country over to foreign capitalists for development, they, of course, supported his administration. Americans in particular took an] active part in building railroads, develop-' ing rubber plantations, raising cattle, andl exploiting tin' rich silver, lead, coppC-" and oil resources. By 1910 some 50.000 Americans lived in Mexico, and American investments had reached a total of a billion] dollars. The Mexican government is overthrown. In 1911 a political upheaval threatened American interests in Mexico In that year the aged Diaz was toppled from power by Francisco Madero, J to I on other refit*** || Mexico probably could not have attracted that much Investment copi promised to introduce social, economic, and political reforms. Before Madero could earn out his program, however, he was challenged by other rebel leaders. They arrested Madero early in 1913 and executed him. Victoriano Huerta (wehr' tah), who had been Madero's commander-in- chief and was believed to have been responsible for his death, became president. Wilson adopts a policy of "watchful waiting." Huerta's violent seizure of power shocked President Wilson, who was inaugurated a month after Madero's death. Though European countries were quick to recognize Huerta's regime. President Wilson refused to do so. The United States, he said, "can have no sympathy with those who seek to seize the power of government to advance their own personal interests or ambitions." Wilson adopted a policy of "watchful waiting" — that is, of waiting until the dictator Huerta was overthrown just as Diaz had been. This was a departure from the usual American policy of recognizing new governments once they had established control of a country. Wilson, in effect, was declaring that the United States would recognize only those governments whose methods of attaining power met with American approval. Wilson also took steps to encourage Huerta's opponents inside Mexico. He allowed arms and ammunition to be shipped to Venustiano Carranza and Pancho Villa (vee' yah), who were leading the opposition. Furthermore, Wilson persuaded Great Britain to withdraw its support from Huerta oy promising concessions in the matter of Panama Canal tolls. Before the opening of the Canal, Congress had passed legislation exempting American coastwise shipping from paying tolls. Great Britain protested that this law violated the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty and gave an unfair advantage to American shippers. When Wilson persuaded Congress to repeal the Tolls Exemption Act, Great Britain agreed to go along '''ith the President's policy of "watchful "'airing" in Mexico. American forces occupy Veracruz. In the spring of 1914, Wilson was forced to Modify his Mexican policy. A squadron °f American war vessels had been stationed near Tampico, Mexico, to protect American lives and property. When a supply party from the U.S.S. Dolphin landed at Tampico, the sailors were arrested and paraded through the streets to jail. Though they were soon allowed to return to their ship, Admiral Mayo demanded a formal apology and a 21-gun salute to the American flag. Huerta was willing to make the apology but refused to order the salute. Wilson asked Congress for authorization to use military force to obtain "the fullest recognition of the rights and dignity of the United States." Further complicating the situation was the arrival at the Mexican port of Veracruz of a German merchant ship bringing machine guns and munitions to Huerta's forces. Wilson decided that drastic action was necessary. Without waiting for authority from Congress, he ordered armed intervention to prevent landing of the munitions. When American forces occupied Veracruz, Huerta promptly broke off relations with the United States. Americans from Old Mexico Immigration from Europe was heavy in the early 1900's, but new Americans were also arriving from Mexico. Improved methods of irrigation were making large-scale agriculture possible in the southwestern states, and field workers came from Mexico to harvest cotton, vegetables, and fruits. Rather than return to Mexico for the short winter, the migrant workers settled in American towns to wait for the next harvest season. Many Mexicans also worked in mines and on railroads. Life was hard for these people; they were poorly paid and often faced discrimination in schools and housing. But the Mexican- Americans found an effective spokesman in Octaviano Larrazolo. He himself was an immigrant from Mexico, who had managed to get on education, became a lawyer, and entered politics. In 1910, when New Mexico was preparing for statehood, Larrazolo succeeded in having guarantees of the rights of Spanish-speaking Americans written into the new state constitution. He later became governor of New Mexico and then United States senator. This type of consultation leading to agreements i aided business in outlier ways as well. Throughout the decade, the government brought very few antitrust eases against corporations. As a result, thousands of new business mergers took place. In addition. Presidents Harding and Coolidge appointed businessmen to such regulator)' commissions as the Federal Trade Commission (page 577) and the Interstate Commerce Commission (page 196). The champion of business co-operation in the 1920's was Herbert Hoover, Secretary of Commerce under both Harding and Coolidge. [ Hoover helped businessmen form voluntary trade associations. Through these organizations, businessmen discussed common problems of production and marketing, factory efficiency, prices, and arbitration of industrial disputes. This sharing of information resulted in less competition and greater standardization of prices. Nevertheless, the Supreme Court ruled in 1925 that the trade associations did not violate the antitrust laws. Taxes are lowered. Another way in which the Republican administrations aided business was by passing favorable tax laws. Though the country had a debt of 24 billion dollars in 1921, Secretary of the Treasury Mellon urged that taxes be reduced, especially on large personal incomes and on corporation income. Mellon believed that the money saved in taxes would be put back into business, thus creating new job opportunities for working people. The Revenue Act of 1921 repealed the excess-profits tax which had been passed during World War I. It also lowered rates on high incomes. Further cuts were approved in the next few years. In spite of the lower tax rates, Mellon was able to reduce the national debt to 16 billion dollars by the end of the decade. Widespread prosperity and high tariffs brought the necessary revenue into the treasury. Tariff rates are raised. During Harding's administration, the Republicans fulfilled their campaign promise to raise tariff rates. In 1921 Congress passed an Emergency Tariff Act, intended to help the farmers by raising rates on several agricultural imports. The next year Congress approved dh prices more recently has been held illegal. 1 the Fordncy-McCumber Act, which reduced the free list and established rates at the general level of the Payne-Aldrich Tariff (page 563). The Fordney-McCumber Act also authorized the President to raise or lower the rates whenever existing duties did not equalize costs of production at home and abroad. In actual practice this provision resulted in 32 increases during the Harding and Coolidge administrations. There were only five cuts in rates, and they applied to such unlikely imports as paintbrush handles and bobwhite quail. The sharp increase in American tariff rates alarmed the countries of western Europe. For most of them it meant reduced trade with the United States, thus making it difficult for them to repay wartime loans through an exchange of goods. Many European countries struck back by raising tariff barriers on imports from the United States. As a result, international trade lagged in the 1920's. This situation hurt the Aineri-i can merchant marine and strained relations^ with our former allies. Congress responds to the demands of veterans. During these same years important legislation was enacted to satisfy certain special-interest groups. The American Legion, founded in 1919, was active in politics much as the Crand Army of the Republic had been after the Civil War. The Legion demanded "adjusted compensation" for all veterans of World War I. That is, they sought bonuses wbich would equalize the difference between the low pay of soldiers and the high wages received by wartime industrial workers. In 1922 Congress passed a bonus bill to provide "adjusted compensation." Although President Harding favored the measure, he vetoed it because Congress had made no provision for raising the necessary funds Two years later Congress passed the bill again, and President Coolidge vetoed it on the same grounds. This time, however, veterans' organizations like the American Legion persuaded Congress to pass the measure over Coolidge s veto. The law provided for a bonus to be paid after twenty years. The amount was to depend on the veterans length of service and the proportion of this^/ A creditor nation must encourage imp©r!S' 1970 War, restrictive legislation, and depression caused immigration to decline after 1910. Fetter immigrants entered the United States in the years 1931-1940 than in any other ten- year period since 1830. time spent overseas. Earlier Congress had also established a Veterans' Bureau to care for hospitalized veterans. Opponents of unrestricted immigration speak out. Another group that exerted pressure consisted of persons wanting to restrict immigration. Throughout the early 1900's opponents of unlimited immigration had charged that the foreign-born lowered American standards of living and swelled the ranks of paupers and criminals. During and immediately after the war, the immigrants were also accused of bringing in dangerous political ideas. Some were charged with being Communists. As a result of such agitation, Congress in 1917 passed a literacy test bill, requiring immigrants to prove that they could read and write a language. Though President Wilson vetoed it, Congress passed the measure over his veto. Three years later the law was amended to exclude immigrants who were "members of the anarchistic and Mmilar classes." Despite these restrictions, 305.000 immigrants entered the United States during 1921. Congress establishes immigration quotas To check the flow of Europeans this country. Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act in 1921. This law limited the number of immigrants from each European country to 3 per cent of the number of people of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. But those who w'anted to restrict immigration still were not satisfied. They felt it was important that the American population be predominantly white, "Anglo-Saxon," and Protestant. President Coolidge gave them his support by announcing that "new arrivals should be limited to our capacity to absorb them into the ranks of good citizenship. America must be kept American." In 1924, therefore. Congress passed an immigration act which reduced the (junta for each country to 2 per cent of the number of that nationality living in the United States in 1890. This measure not only reduced the number of immigrants admitted to about 160,000 a year but favored those who came from northern and western Eu- rojie. Furthermore, immigrants from Asia were specifically barred. This provision angered the Japanese, who had scrupulously lived up to the Gentlemen's Agreement (page 593). Citizens of Canada and the Latin American republics were not subject to quota restrictions. The Immigration Act of 1924 further provided that, beginning in 1927, the total number of immigrants would be limited to 150.000 people per year. Each European country would be given a quota based upon the jiercentage of people of that national Man-Hours Used. Because the "national origins" of the American population were difficult to determine, this last provision did not actually go into effect until 1929. Then, the Great Depression and. later, World War 11 completely changed the situation. In almost every year from 1932 to 1945, less than one third of the quota was filled. During the depths of the depression in the 1930's there were more people leaving the country than there were immigrants arriving. Farmers suffer hard times. "Coolidge prosperity," as we have noted, did little for the farmer. I.and values and farm prices had been high during the war years. But in the 1920's they fell hack to prewar levels. One reason for lower prices was that the use of new farm machinery and scientific farming increased farm output by 30 per cent between 1910 and 1925. During the war years, the increased volume of farm production had been easily absorbed, but surpluses mounted in the 1920's — and surpluses meant lower prices. Also, American fanners faced greater competition in the world market. This competition came (1) from the farmers of European countries that had recovered from the ravages of the war and (2) from the increased farm output of Canada, Australia, Argentina, and Soviet Russia. Still another factor was that nations like China which could have used our agricultural surpluses were unable to pay for them. Finally, southern cotton growers faced competition from new textiles, such as rayon, as well as from cotton growers in Russia. India, and Egypt. From 1919 to 1929 farm income dropped from fourteen and a half billion dollars to a little over eleven billion dollars. The "farm bloc" tries to improve the situation. Representatives from the agricul-1 tural states, both Democrats and Republi- j cans, formed a "farm bloc" in Congress. The farm bloc encouraged the formation of farmers' co-operatives and in 1922 sponsored a law exempting such organizations from antitrust acts. In the following year Congress provided low-interest loans to agricultural co-operatives as well as to indi^ vidual farmers. These measures failed, however, to improve the farmer's lot significantly. Farm leaders then proposed a solution to the problem of surpluses. Under this plan, surpluses would be purchased by a government agency at prices based on prewar averages. The government might hold surpluses until a poor crop year created a demand for them; or the surpluses might be sold in the world market at prevailing prices. "I don't believe we can do much about it." ► CHECK-UP See Key. 1. How did the Eighteenth Amendment come to be passed? The Nineteenth Amendment? What points were stressed by Republicans ond Democrats in the 1920 election? What interpretation can be made of the outcome? 2. What scandals marred Harding's administration? Why was Coolidge a popular President? What issues were raised in the 1924 election by the candidacies of Al Smith and Robert La Follette? 3. How did Republican administrations help business? Veterans? What restrictions were placed on immigration? Why? How did the immigration picture change after 1929? 4. Why did farmers experience hard times after World War I? What help was provided by Congress? What were the provisions of the McNary-Haugen bill? 3 The 1920 s Witness Important Social and Cultural Changes Cities grow at the expense of the countryside. During the 1920's the number of farm workers in the American labor force decreased by about one million. Because of increased efficiency in production and low prices for farm products, farm people Eleanor Roosevelt, show,, here with Mary McLeod Bethunc, became an important national figure in her own right. Among her many interests was the securing of equal rights and oppor. trinities for minority groups. Mrs. Bethunc founded nc. thunc-Cookman College i" Florida and served as its president for many years. government regulation of banks and stock exchanges. In fact, the Republican Party platform endorsed all of these measures as carlv as 1910. litis bipartisan support of the major New Deal reforms remained unchallenged for many years. Minority groups make gains in the 1930's. /One hundred years from now historians may well say that one of the significant achievements of the New Deal was the opening up of opportunities for minority ^groups within American society. Even during the progressive era the government had paid little attention to the problems of Negroes, for example. Unfortunately discrimination was present in New Deal relief programs when these were administered by state agencies or individuals prejudiced against the Negro. Despite this limitation, such New Deal measures as the Farm Security Administration, the various housing authorities, and the CCC provided opportunities for Negroes that had not existed earlier. Moreover, members of minority groups were appointed to major government posts. Robert C. Weaver and William II. Hastie, both Negroes, held responsible positions in the Interior Department, and McLeod Bethune, a Negro educator, served as an official in the National Youth Adminis- This statement takes on meaning when it is viewed 1954. t rat ion.' President Roosevelt also appointed a larger number of Jews and Catholics to federal judgeships than had any previous President. Leaders of organized labor had a voice in formulating government policies, and Roosevelt was the first President to appoint a woman to the Cabinet. In the long run, this movement toward a more democratic society will stand out as one of the major contributions of tin1 New Deal. > CHECK-UP Sea Key. 1. Why did Roosevelt try to "pack" the Supreme Court? Why did his suggestion lead to controversy? What was the outcome? 2. What views were expressed about causes of the 1937 recession? What new farm legislo- lation was passed? What was the result? What legislation was enacted to regulate wages and hours? To improve housing? To strengthen the Pure Food and Drug Act? 3. How did New Deal Democrats and the conservatives differ on goals? What happened to the reform program after 1938? Why? 4. How do historians evaluate the New Deal? What gains were made by minority groups under the New Deal? Marv 5 Tlie NY A was a work-relief program for I*'1'* sons between the ages of 16 and 25, in the light of increasingly ropid gains since 5 American Culture Flou rishes Du ri ng the New Deal Years The New Deal encourages the arts. 11, die 1930's, for the first time in American history, the federal government undertook the responsibility of aiding the creative arts. Roosevelt believed that artists, musicians, actors, and writers were entitled to government aid during the depression, just as much as farmers and other workers w ere. Several WPA projects were designed to encourage the fine arts. The Federal Arts Project subsidized painters and sculptors who produced works of art for post offices, other public buildings, and parks. WPA orchestras gave free school concerts as well as public performances. WPA funds also supported theatrical groups, which staged dramatic performances in parts of the country that otherwise could not have seen live theater. The Federal Writers Project employed teachers and writers to collect documents, write local histories, and prepare guidebooks and surveys. Writers explore American problems. Many readers found escape from the realities of the depression in Margaret Mitchell's Gone With the Wind. A romantic story of southern life during the Civil War and after, this was one of the best-selling novels of the 1930's. But the depression awakened in many fiction writers a new sense of social responsibility. In their novels they sought to describe the sufferings of underprivileged people and thus stir the consciences of those who were better oil. In the 1930's John Dos Passos completed his trilogy U.S.A. (a novel in three parts). In it he portrays the unhappiness and frustrations of rich and i>oor, immigrants and native-boni, the educated and the illiterate. The tragedy of the "Okies" who trekked westward from the dust howl to California was captured by John Steinbeck in The Grapes of Wrath. Of the writers of the 1920's whom wc read about in Chapter 31, Ernest Hemingway was probably the most creative in the following decade. One of his best novels, published in 1940, was For Whom the Bell Tolls. This study of life and death in the Spanish Civil War (page 719) helped make Americans conscious of the stniggle going on in Europe. A young writer from North Carolina, Thomas Wolfe, displayed his literary talents in four autobiographical novels. In the first of these, Look Homeward. Angel, he described his boyhood. Wolfe's great promise A "New Deal" for the Indians Franklin Roosevelt's advisers realized that the Indian policy laid down in the Dawes Act of 1887 (page 429) had not worked very well. This plan of "turning Indians into red-skinned whites" had made many Indian tribes wards of the federal government. Schools on the reservations ignored Indian arts and crafts and discouraged tribal customs but did little to prepare the Indians for absorption into American patterns of living. Moreover, though the Indians owned separote parcels of land, the soil was often too poor to support them. In the twentieth century, oil was found on some Indian lands, but most of the tribes barely managed to eke out an existence. John Collier, Roosevelt's Commissioner of Indian Affairs, worked out a "New Deal for the American Indians." The Wheeler-Howard Act of 1934 tried to revive community life on the reservations. It provided for more self- government and for the holding of land by the tribe rather than by individuals. Indians were instructed in soil conservation and methods of raising livestock, and there was a strong revival of interest in Indian culture, including traditional arts and crafts. The number of Indians, which had fallen to 240,000 in 1920, began to increase. But the Indians continue to be one of the most neglected minority groups in this country. after the war. 7/ Worr continued to serve these branches of the armed force recruited bv the armed forces. fBv (lie end (if the war more than 250,000 women had joined the army (WACS), the navy Lj (WAVES), the coast guard (SPARS), and the marines. Many other women served as military nurses. America's total armed Iforces numbered twelve million by 1945. American production is vastly increased. Soon after Pearl Harbor, the President established the War Production Board to mobilize the country's resources and industry. The WPB placed government contracts for war supplies and determined which manufacturers would receive raw materials and man power. Despite some administrative tangles and occasional shortages of oil and rubber, production increased spectacularly. The automobile industry gave up the manufacture of passenger cars to produce airplanes and tanks, as well as trucks and other vehicles needed by a modern army. Other peacetime industries also converted to war production. Shipyards speeded up production until in the summer of 1943 five ships a day were being launched. f\ new . l " " • synthetic rubber industry had to be created during the war years because Japanese conquests had cut off the supply of crude rubber from Southeast Asia. As factories producing essential materials worked around the clock, the average work week jumped from 38 to 44 hours, and average factory wages doubled between 1939 and 1945. Many women took jobs in defense factories. Corporate profits also doubled. Moreover, though the farm population decreased during the war years, agricultural output increased and farm income more than doubled. War production thus helped solve the problem of unemployment and boosted the national income from 73 billion dollars in 1939 to 181 billion dollars in 1945. The cost of the war is enormous. The cost of World War II to the United States was more than 300 billion dollars, about thirteen times the amount spent in World War 1. Approximately 40 per cent of the total cost of the Second World War was met by increased taxation; the remainder was added to the national debt. As a result, the national debt skyrocketed from 40 billion dollars in 1939 to 258 billion in 1945. An example of an industry created to fill a wartime need that continued after the war. Sale of war bonds and savings staim*. brought the government over 100 billj()n dollars. Income taxes and luxury taxes were raised to unprecedented levels. The number of income-tax payers rose from 4 million in I 1939 to more than 42 million in 1945. Rates as high as 94 per cent were imposed on the largest incomes. In addition, the practice I of withholding income taxes was introduced. Under this system employers with! held federal income taxes from their employees' pay checks and turned the monev over to the government. Many wartime restrictions are imposed on the home front. By and large, Americans accepted heavy taxes and other wartime burdens without grumbling. But shortages of important items and the threat of inflation made necessary a system of price control and rationing. The Office of Brice Administration (OBA) was set up to prevent inflation. It imposed price ceilings (limits) on a wide variety of consumer goods, and the War Labor Board tried to limit increases in wages and salaries. When shortages developed, the OBA began to ration certain consumer items. This meant that civilians could only buy specified quantities of sugar, meat, fats, coffee, canned goods, shoes, gasoline, fuel oil, and tires. The OBA also controlled rents. Prices did inch up, despite OBA controls and rationing, but such measures prevented serious inflation. There were other inconveniences, but civilians accepted them as necessary to the war effort. Shortages of gasoline and tires limited automobile transportation, and the space available for civilian travel on airplanes and trains was reduced. The possibility of air and submarine attack caused cities to hold practice air raids and blackouts and to order the dimming of lights in coastal areas. Beople served on draft boards or as air raid wardens, auxiliary policemen and firemen, and hospital and Red Cross aides. Women wore straight skirts rather than pleated ones to save material; cuffs were abandoned on men's trousers for the , same reason. Women factory workers l>e- gan to wear trousers — a fashion change which survived the end of the war. Scientists make a vital contribution to the war effort. Aware of the importance d-d This was a revolutionary change m the iea®f01 tax structure. American industry produced enormous quantities of material and vehicles needed hy the armed forces during World War II. The photo above shows how women filled vital jobs in defense factories, replacing the men who had gone to war. Shipyards performed miracles. Scenes like this christening at San Francisco (right) were frequent as the yards swiftly turned out new vessels. scientific research in the war effort, the government gave support and encouragement to scientists. The Office of Scientific Research and Development, headed by Van- nevar Rush, welcomed refugee scientists from Italy and Germany and co-ordinated their work with British and American scientists. The results were impressive. Rritish research on radar prior to 1940 enabled their planes to intercept German bornbers in the Battle of Britain. Working together. Allied scientists then developed methods of detecting submarines with the form of radar called sonar. They also developed short- range rockets. Medical researchers produced the powerful pesticide DDT and the antibiotic penicillin. They found new ways of fighting tropical diseases, introduced more effective methods of treating burns, and devised new surgical techniques. Allied scientists produce atomic energy. The most significant scientific advance of the war years was the harnessing of atomic energy. In 1939 Albert Einstein and other scientists told President Roosevelt that the Nazis were experimenting with atomic fission and might produce a nuclear bornb. They urged that this country begin work- on such a weapon. Thus, Roosevelt authorized the secret Manhattan District Project to develop an atomic bornb. Under the direction of Italian-born Enrico Fermi, the first man-made nuclear chain reaction took place in a laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1942. This successful experiment ushered in the atomic era. But it required many more months of work to translate this knowledge into a nuclear weapon. A team of physicists built the first atomic bornb at Los Alamos, New Mexico, and successfully exploded it on July 16, 1945. Most minority groups fare better in World War II. There was relatively little agitation against German-Americans and Italian-Americans during World War II, partly because the government did not seek to "mobilize patriotism" as it had in World War I. Furthermore, there were fewer foreign-born citizens, and not many of them sympathized with the regimes of Hitler or Mussolini. The unusual conditions of the war years enabled black Americans to win new opportunities. Negro leaders called attention to the contradiction in fighting totalitarianism abroad while continuing the system of The renowned scientist Albert Einstein (above) left Cermantj in 11)12 to come to this country Charles Drew, a Negro surgeon (right), helped save many lives during World War II by his work on the preservation and storage of blood. segregation in this country.1 Their first goal was to increase employment opportunities for Negroes in defense plants. In 1941, A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, threatened to lead a Negro march on Washington unless the President took action. As a result, Roosevelt issued an executive order forbidding defense industries to discriminate against Negroes in hiring workers. A Fair Employment Practices Committee was established to carry out this order. The work of the FEPC, as well as the man power shortage, opened new employment opportunities to Negroes. Some segregation practices were also abandoned in the armed services. And in 1944, NAACP lawyers won an important victory in the fight for civil rights. The Supreme Court ruled that state laws which excluded black voters from primary elections violated the Fifteenth Amendment. The drive for Negro rights increased racial tension during the war years. Some employers and southern whites opposed the FEPC, and the 1944 Court decision was unpopular in some southern states. But the 1 More than a million Negroes served in the American armed forces during World War II; half a million of them went overseas. most serious demonstration of anti-Negro feeling occurred in Detroit, a city to which many southern Negroes and whites had come to work in defense plants. Egged on by agitators, Negroes and whites clashed on a hot Sunday afternoon in June, 1943. Federal troops finally put down the riot, but not until 34 lives had been lost. The war brought opportunities and problems to other minority groups. In the southwestern states Mexican-Americans found new economic opportunities opened to them as a result of the labor shortage. The intensified need for food made new jobs available in the orchards and vegetable fields of the Southwest. Moreover, the large-scale growers offered much better pay and improved working conditions. Many Mexican- Americans also found jobs in industry where they had little chance of employment before the war. As was true of all minority groups in this country, citizens of Mexican descent served with great valor in the armed forces. The tension of wartime living, however, created problems for this minority group just as it did for black Americans. In Los Angeles clashes between young Mexican- Americans and servicemen from local bases finally erupted into street riots. Moreover. Mexican-Americans continued to face obstacles forced upon them by discrimination. One group of people who suffered a great injustice during the war were the Japanese- Americans. The government, fearing sabotage in the event of a Japanese invasion, moved those on the West Coast to inland relocation centers. The American Civil Liberties Union denounced this action as "the worst single wholesale violation of civil rights of American citizens in our history." Despite this discrimination, many Americans of Japanese ancestry served with honor and courage in the United States armed forces. After the war, the government in effect recognized its error and appropriated funds to compensate these Japancse- Americans. Roosevelt wins a fourth term. During the war years, the United States held its congressional and presidential elections as usual, proving the strength of a democracy even in times of national emergency. Hie Republicans made gains in the congressional elections of 1942 and had high hopes for victory in the next presidential election. At their convention in 1944, the Republicans nominated Governor Thomas E. Dewey of New York for President and Governor John W. Bricker of Ohio for Vice-President. At the Democratic convention President Roosevelt was quickly renominated. But there was disagreement over the choice of a running mate. Vice-President Wallace had the support of many New Dealers, while the choice of the southern conservative delegates was James Byrnes of South Carolina. Finally the convention settled on Senator Harry S. Truman of Missouri, an able politician and a popular member of the upper house. In the campaign, Dewey found no fault with the President's conduct of the war, endorsed plans for an international organization, and approved the broad outlines of the New Deal. All he could promise the voters was better administration. The President, stung by the charge that he was "a tired old man," waged a vigorous campaign, climaxed by a day-long drive in an open car through a heavy rain in New York City. The election pros ed to be Roosevelt's closest victory. He and Truman received less than 25 million votes to 22 million for Dewey and Bricker. The electoral vote was 432 to 99. The Democrats kept their majority in the Senate and increased their strength in the House. CHECK-UP See Key 1. Whot contributions to the wor effort were mode by the United States in terms of armed forces? Industrial production? Agricultural production? How did the country finance its war costs? Check inflation? Cope with shortages of important products? 2. How did scientists help to win the war? 3. How did wartime conditions affect members of various minority groups? Why were Japa- nese-Americans living on the West Coast "re- located"? Why was this unjust? The Allies Achieve Victory Section 1 of this chapter told how the Allies brought the Axis advance to a halt and Itegan to take the offensive. In this section we shall see how Allied military forces closed in on the Axis powers and won complete victory. Roosevelt and Churchill meet at Casablanca. In January, 1943, President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Churchill met at Casablanca, Morocco, with their chiefs of staff. The Allied leaders reached a number of important decisions at this conference. 4'op American military advisers favored the early creation of a "second front." They felt that the time was ripe for an invasion of France and a direct assault on Germany. But Churchill again argued against such a strike. He believed that the conquest of North Africa should be followed by an attack on the "soft underbelly" of the Axis. By this he meant Sicily and the Italian mainland and perhaps the Balkans. Such a campaign, he pointed out, would tie up many German and Italian troops and thus indirectly relieve pressure on the Russians. Churchill's argument carried, and it was | A jubilant President Truman displays an early edition of the Chicago Tribune, which mistakenly announced a Dewey victory. foreign policy and endorsed his proposals for domestic reform. Over the opposition of southern delegates, the convention approved a strong civil-rights plank, calling for a permanent. They nominated Governor J, Strom Thurmond of South Carolina as their candidate for the presidency. The Dixiecrats hoped that they eoidd prevent any presidential candidate from getting a majority of the electoral votes and thus throw the election into the House of Representatives. Truman's chances look slim. Few people except Truman himself thought lie could win against such overwhelming odds. After the political conventions had been held, the President called a special session of Congress and challenged the Republicans to carry out the promises of domestic reform included in their platform. Because nothing came of this session, Truman waged his campaign on the theme of the "do-nothing" Congress. While public-opinion polls and newspapers confidently predicted a Truman defeat, the scrappy President conducted a "one-man crusade" throughout the country. In contrast. Governor Dewey waged an overconfident campaign, speaking in general terms and saying nothing to endanger the expected Republican victory. Some disgruntled Republicans called it a "me-too" campaign. J Truman wins an upset victory. On election night the Chicago Tribune put out a special edition announcing in banner headlines "Dewey Defeats Truman." But much to the surprise of everyone, the Democrats won a stunning victory. Truman polled 24 million votes and Governor Dewey nearly 22 million. The President received 303 electoral votes to the Republican candidate's 189. Wallace and Thurmond each won about a million votes, and the latter candidate succeeded in carrying four southern states. President Truman's supporters were jubilant. They predicted that the Democratic majorities elected to lroth houses of Congress would now enable the President to put through his program. But their prophecy was soon proved wrong. The same coalition of Republicans and southern Democrats that had blocked reform leg- Seldom if ever have two candidates waged as different campaigns. f p. conservative reaction set in also after World War I. islation in the late 1930's and in the postwar years continued to block Truman's recommendations during his second term. Truman again requests domestic reforms. When he addressed Congress early in 1949, President Truman gave his domestic program a name — the Fair Deal — and described it as "an extension of the New Deal." He called for civil-rights legislation, broader Social Security coverage, a higher minimum wage, more public housing, health insurance, and application of the TY'A idea (page 695) to other rivers. He also proposed that agricultural benefits be increased and that the Taft-Hartley Act be repealed. None of these proposals was new; the President had suggested all of them earlier. But the Congress elected in 1948, like the previous Congress, showed a definite lack of interest. A majority of its members felt that the government should not undertake expensive new welfare programs. They were more concerned with protecting states' rights, reducing taxes and the government debt, regulating organized labor, and freeing business from excessive government regulation. Some congressmen were strongly ^opposed to Truman's civil rights program. Congress goes its own way. Congress did accept a few of the President's proposals. It raised the minimum wage from 40 cents an hour to 75 cents. Social Security payments were increased, and coverage was extended to ten million additional workers. A new housing act provided money for slum clearance and the construction of new housing for low-income families. Congress continued the system of parity payments for farmers hut turned down an administration plan intended to reduce agricultural surpluses. Congress also rejected a plan for national health insurance, and took no action on civil-rights legislation. A few minor revisions were made in the Taft-Ihartley Act. A new immigration act is passed. Since the end of the war, President Truman had been asking Congress to liberalize the immigration laws. He thought that the quota system (page 655) should lie changed and that "displaced persons," who In some coses these were charged against future quotas eliminated the quota system. had been made homeless by the war, should be admitted. (By 1950, Congress^ had admitted some 600,000 displaced per-, sons. | Two years later Congress passed a new immigration law but ignored the President's recommendations. The McCar- ran-Walter Act kept the quota system, though it lifted the long-time ban on Oriental immigration by establishing small quotas for Asian peoples. Other provisions of the bill denied admission to immigrants with past Communist associations, and provided for the deportation of aliens with Communist or "subversive" backgrounds. Truman vetoed the McCarran Act, but Congress passed the measure a second time with the necessary two-thirds majority. The United States investigates Communist sympathizers. When President Truman began his "tough" policy against the Russians (page 759), lie established a commission to investigate government employees and dismiss those who sympathized with communism. Later he created a Loyalty Review Board to pass judgment on government workers accused by the FBI of being Communist agents or "security risks." During the rest of Truman's term in office some 500 persons held to be security risks were removed from the government payroll, while more than three million were cleared. Meanwhile, the House Un-American Activities Committee startled the nation with the perplexing case of Alger Hiss. Hiss had served in the State Department from 1936 to 1947. In 1948 a self-confessed former spy, Whittaker Chambers, testified before the House Committee that Hiss had been a Communist spy in the 1930's. Hiss denied the charge and sued Chambers for slander. Since more than seven years had elapsed, the statute of limitations3 protected Hiss from being prosecuted for espionage. He was, however, tried for perjury, but the jury was unable to agree on a verdict. At a second trial, Hiss was convicted and sentenced to five years in prison. Some liberals maintained that Hiss 3 This law provides that a person may not be prosecuted for a crime that took place more than seven years earlier. Immigration legislation enacted in 1965 The "big lie" is a fovorite tool of propagandists. It attracts attention and starts rumors was the victim of an overzealous Un- American Activities Committee, while conservatives believed that the courts had vindicated the House Committee. Soon after the Soviet Union exploded its first atomic bornb (page 765), a naturalized British scientist admitted having given top- secrct information to the Russians. Americans began to wonder how many Communist agents were posing as upright, loyal citizens. Communists are convicted under the Smith Act. The government had already taken steps to restrict Communist activities in the United States. The Smith Act, passed in 1940, had made it illegal for anyone to teach or advocate the overthrow of the government or to belong to any group which sought that goal. In 1949 eleven top leaders of the American Communist Part)' were convicted of violating the Smith Act. They appealed to the Supreme Court, which upheld the convictions. The Court ruled that the Smith Act was constitutional, for a conspiracy to overthrow the government constituted what Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes had described in 1919 as a "clear and present danger" (page 649). A minority of the justices, however, believed that the Smith Act violated the rights guaranteed to all Americans in the First Amendment. The McCarran Internal Security Act is passed. Because Congress felt that the Smith Act did not provide a sufficient safeguard against Communist activities, it passed the McCarran Internal Security Act in 1950. This act not only outlawed Communist organizations but required them to publish their records. {All members of the 'Communist Tarty and of Communist-front organizations had to register with the Attorney General. Communists were barred from employment in defense plants and were denied passports. Immigrants who had once been members of totalitarian organizations were prohibited from entering the United States. As it turned out, this provision made it difficult for people escaping from iron-curtain countries to find refuge in the United States. President Truman vetoed the McCar- ran Act on the grounds that it punished This would amount to self-incrimination if the Co people for their ideas, not their deeds. "In a free country," he said, "we punish men for the crimes they commit but never for the opinions they have." But Congress passed the measure over the President's veto. McCarthy publicizes the Communist issue Early in 19.50, Senator Joseph McCarthy of Wisconsin made a sensational charge. McCarthy claimed that he had the names of 205 (later he said 57) Communists "still working and making policy" in the State Department. The Senate promptly appointed a subcommittee to look into McCarthy's charges. Since not one of the charges could be proved, the committee branded the Republican senator's speech a "fraud and a hoax." Undaunted, McCarthy broadened his attack and accused the "whole group of twisted-thinking New Dealers" of being Communists. The Communist issue became a formidable political weapon. Scores of public officials climbed on the bandwagon by charging that others were "soft on com- munism." McCarthy went after bigger1 game. He accused former Secretary of State George C. Marshall of disloyalty and questioned the loyalty of Secretary of State Dean Acheson and President Truman^ Across the country, professors, teachers, authors, librarians, and labor leaders who advocated social reform or criticized the nation's foreign policy were accused. A general and a governor faced each other in the 1952 election. In the first picture. General and Mrs. Eisenhower are being greeted by Thomas E. Dewey, the Republican presidential candidate in the two previous elections. The Democratic candidate, Governor Adlai Stevenson of Illinois, and his running mate. Senator John Sparkman of Alabama, appear in the picture at right. the public. Truman tried to settle the steel strike by arbitration. When that failed, he ordered government seizure of the steel plants. The President felt he had the authority to do this because of the emergency created by the Korean War. 4. What reforms were included in Truman's Fair Deal? Why were many of them turned down by Congress? Which were possed? What was the McCarran-Walter Act? 5. How did communism in government become an issue? What were the provisions of the Smith Act? The McCarran Internal Security Act? What charges were made by Senator McCarthy? Why did dissatisfaction with the Truman administration increase? families. Though declining farm prosperity was the chief reason, another was that cities provided greater opportunities for women to find jobs. By the 1950's one out of every three women was holding down a full-time job. Some urban Negroes also fared better as earning power rose. More education, a wider variety of available jobs, and minimum wage laws were responsible. A growing number of black Americans found employment in clerical and sales jobs, skilled factory jobs, and the professions. Americans enjoy a high standard of living. The larger incomes of most American families went into material goods and services rather than savings. Many families moved into so-called ranch houses in the suburbs. New household appliances took their place beside the familiar vacuum sweeper, washing machine, and refrigerator. Increasing numbers of Americans hastened to equip their homes with dishwashers, freezers, clothes dryers and hair dryers, electric coffee pots and skillets, food blenders and mixers, television, high-fidelity phonographs, air-conditioners, power lawnmowers, and extension telephones. Many families had two cars, and a growing number owned summer cottages and boats. Still another sign of prosperity was the increasing amount of pleasure travel. Eight million Americans traveled abroad during the decade of the 1950's, and many more took long vacation trips within the United States. Because most Americans preferred to travel in their own cars or by airplane, the passenger income of railroads and some bus companies suffered. In many large cities commuter rail lines closed down because former passengers chose to drive their cars to work. ''Pocket*" of poverty still exist. While most Americans shared in the economic prosperity of the postwar years, some did not. In The Affluent Society, John Kenneth Galbraith observed that poverty was no longer "a massive affliction" as in the 1930's. But for some people, poverty was a very real thing. Almost every city still had large slum areas, where people with little or no education and few job skills were crowded into substandard housing. Many of them existed on relief payments. In a few areas of the country, poverty resulted from the depressed state of certain industries. Coal-mining, for instance was hurt by the increased use of oil, gas' and electricity. A growing number of mines were forced to close down. Those that stayed open introduced labor-saving machinery to make their operations profitable. Thus, thousands of coal miners, especially in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, lost their jobs. Other Americans whose incomes remained low were small fanners who did not participate in the parity program. Still another group of people who lived in poverty were the migrant farm workers. These people moved from one area of the country to another, wherever unskilled farm labor was needed. Often of Negro, Mexican, or Puerto Rican background, these families traveled north with the harvest season, few earning more than a thousand dollars a year. Their children had little chance to get an education. The population increases rapidly. Another significant development of the postwar era was a sharp rise in population. The total number of Americans jumped from 1-10 million in 1945 to 180 million by I960.5 More than three million immigrants! were admitted during this period, but th<?J major reasons for the population increase were a high birth rate and a longer life span. A trend toward earlier marriage and larger families produced a bumper crop of babies in the 1950's. At the same time, the use of antibiotics and new surgical techniques helped reduce the death rate. By I960 the average life span was 70 years. The West grew faster than any other part of the country. California especially attracted people from other states. In the 1960's it passed New York as the most populous state in the Union. While urban communities continued to grow in the 1950's, the most startling rate of growth was in the suburbs. By I960 nearly 55 million Americans were suburbanites. Some 70 per cent of the population lived in urban or suburban communities. A new term megalopolis — was coined to refer to an ex' By 1970 tlie population had reached nearly 205 million. the period 1845-1860, there were about 3,615,000 immigrants, during 1900-1915, there were 13,255.40 an issue uihioh students may ujish to discuss. This is tensive area covering several major centers of population. Social scientists applied this term, for example, to the densely settled coastal area reaching from Boston to Washington, D.C. (map, page 816). Critics worry about American conformity. Some observers claimed that television, increased travel, and the rapid growth of the suburbs (especially those with almost identical houses) reflected a growing "sameness" in American life. More and more people were holding so-called "white-collar" jobs. They worked as salesmen and office personnel or held professional, managerial, and executive positions. Their incomes, clothes, houses, entertainment, and recreation tended to be similar. Said one historian, "More people than ever before had white-collar jobs, white-collar incomes, white-collar educations, and white- collar values." Some Americans regarded this development as a natural consequence of the continued expansion of the middle class. But critics charged that the trend toward conformity led Americans to avoid independent thought and controversy and to seek personal security rather than individual achievement. American schools are subjected to criticism. This re-examination of goals in American life carried over into the field of education. The country's public schools came under close scrutiny, especially after the launching of Sputnik in 1957. Many Americans concluded that the Russians were beating us in space because the Soviet educational program required more of students. Critics of the American high-school CUrriculum demanded greater emphasis on science and mathematics. It was also proposed that schools make advanced courses available to gifted students. Both the government and private foundations provided foods to develop better programs in science, Mathematics, foreign languages, and other object areas. As a result, advanced-place- Ment programs enabled capable high-school students in many schools to take college- ®vcl courses. The colleges, in turn, revised eshman and sophomore courses to meet e needs of well-prepared high-school graduates. Another problem which faced both schools and colleges in the 1950's was the sharp increase in enrollments. Population growth was chiefly responsible, but another factor was the desire of a greater percentage of young people to go to college. Television entertains America. The charge of conformity in the 1950's was most often aimed at television. While radio and the movies had captured the hearts of Americans in the 1920's, the great love affair of the post-World War II generation was with television. Though experiments with television had begun in the 1930's, sets were not generally available until the late 1940's. But within ten years nearly 85 per cent of American homes acquired television sets, and some had two or three. Many families depended on the "TV" for their news, weather reports, and entertainment. Television's tremendous popularity brought varied reactions. Many critics claimed that advertisers had too much influence on the scheduling of television programs. It was also charged that both advertisers and television executives underrated viewers' intelligence. As a result, said the critics, television channels were clogged with low-grade westerns, crime dramas, and comedy shows. Others pointed out that television also broadcast many stimulating programs. They cited original television dramas, productions of well-known plays and operas, symphonic concerts, documentaries, interviews with public figures, and coverage of political campaigns and other special news events. The movie theaters felt the competition of television. From 1945 to 1960 attendance fell from 90 million a week to 40 million. The motion-picture industry tried to meet the competition in several ways. Drive-in theaters sought to lure patrons from the highways. Some producers hired foreign stars, made their films in exotic parts of the world, or spent millions in producing "ep- ics." American movies still had their stars, but Hollywood had lost much of its glamour. Americans show a lively interest in the arts. One answer to the charge of conformity was the steadily growing interest of Americans in literature, drama, music, art, and architecture. Many people acquired original prints, paintings, and pieces of wished to wage an "unconditional war on poverty" by helping the nearly nine million families in the United States who had incomes below 3000 dollars a year. In 1964 Congress created an Office of Economic Opportunity to supervise a number of anti-poverty programs. A Job Corps provided training and education for unemployed youth, most of them school dropouts. A domestic version of the Peace Corps, called VISTA,2 sent volunteers to migrant labor camps, Indian reservations, city slums, and poverty-stricken rural areas. The Community Action Program brought together federal, state, local, and private funds to enable communities to develop anti-poverty programs of their own design. Many conservatives express opposition. The "right wing" of the Republican Party, known as the "far right" or "ultra-conserva- tives," was displeased with the rapid changes taking place around them. They were bitter about recent civil rights legislation and liberal Supreme Court rulings on racial issues. Moreover, they opposed the Court's rulings requiring both congressional districts and state legislative districts to have substantially equal populations. Because the "one man, one vote" principle would increase the representation of cities and suburbs, conservatives feared that the influence of the rural areas would be diminished. Finally, supporters of the "far right" were disturbed by American foreign policy, particularly foreign aid programs and cooperation with the United Nations. The most popular leader of the conservatives in the early 1960's was Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona. The "right wing" hoped to capture control of the Republican Party and nominate Goldwater in 1964. The parties select their candidates in 1964. Goldwater, of course, was not the only Republican hopeful. The strongest contenders among the "moderate" Republicans were Henry Cabot Lodge, Nelson Rockefeller, George Romney, and Richard Nixon. The country paid close attention to the outcome of the primaries. Goldwater 2 Volunteers in Service to America narrowly won the California primary and then was selected at the Republican convention as the party's candidate. Johnson wins an overwhelming victory. The Democrats nominated President Johnson and ratified his choice of a running mate, Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota. Support for the Democratic administration was widespread. Businessmen felt that the Democrats had a better chance of maintaining prosperity. Professional politicians admired Johnson's control over Congress. Civil rights advocates knew that their movement would fare better under Johnson than under Goldwater. Liberals felt that Johnson's reform legislation was fulfilling their dreams for a New Frontier. The outcome of the election was no surprise. Goldwater carried only six states — Arizona, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina. Johnson received 61 per cent of the popular vote, and the Democrats won impressive majorities in both houses of Congress. Standing at the height of his popularity with the American people, President Johnson pushed ahead with plans for the "Great Society." Congress approves sweeping reforms. President Johnson's relentless drive persuaded the new Congress to enact a far- reaching program of legislation. Funds for poverty programs were doubled. An economic development program was created for the depressed eleven-state Appalachian Mountain region. Congress passed two education bills, providing more than a milli°n dollars for the nation's elementary schoo s and over two billion dollars for higher education. The Eighty-ninth Congress also recog nized the importance of urban problems. n 1965 over seven billion dollars were ap proved for a four-year program of urban renewal and construction of public housing' The following year a Model Cities Act pro* vided funds for comprehensive projects ^ blighted urban areas. The program volved aid for housing, health, education, employment, welfare, transportation, public facilities. Still other laws were enacted. T he Vo Rights Act of 1965 strengthened the Pr^, iincome made it unlikely that ihthui ot the major partiet would a easier for voters to choose between it ond a "liberal" party. Lyndon B. Johnson exercised shrewd political strategy and a relentless drive in his "war on poverty." Here he is joined by members of Opportunities Industrialization Centers, a private organization which promotes economic self-suf- feienaj in black communities. visions of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and added nearly 900,000 Negroes to the voter registration lists. The long-discussed Medicare bill also became law in 1965. It pro- tided medical insurance under Social Security for persons over 65. To meet the costs of this plan, Social Security taxes were increased. Immigration policy was drastically changed when Congress eliminated the national origins quotas. The new law set a limit of 170,000 immigrants each year from countries outside the Western Hemisphere. People with relatives in the United States °r with special skills were to be given priority; no more than 20,000 immigrants from a single country might enter in a given year. Immigration from countries of the Western Hemisphere, previously not re- slricted, would now be limited to 120.000 annually. Moreover, Congress approved the Twen- ty-fifth Amendment to the Constitution, which was ratified by the states in 1967. This Amendment authorized the President to name a Vice-President if the latter office should become vacant. Moderate Republicans quickly looked ahead to the 1966 congressional elections. They criticized Johnson's war on poverty for its high costs. Negro riots in the cities were blamed on the administration. Johnson's conduct of the war in Vietnam was also an issue. When the 1966 election results were totaled, the Republican National Committee Chairman commented: "Tt looks as if we have a very live elephant." The party gained 8 governorships, 47 new seats in the House of Representatives, and 3 seats in the Senate. Among the newly elected Republicans was Edward Brooke of Massachusetts, the first Negro elected to the Senate since recoilstruction. The new Congress is stalemated. The Democrats still had majorities in both houses of the new Congress. But a coalition of southern Democrats and conservative Republicans could block administration measures. Johnson's escalation of the war in Vietnam met rising criticism from both liberals and conservatives. Congress grudgingly approved additional military requests, but only after sharp debate on the administration's Vietnam policy. Congress also cut appropriations for some of Johnson's domestic programs, particularly the war on poverty. The President argued that the country was able to meet the costs both of the war abroad and reform at home. When 2. What steps were taken by Kennedy in support of civil rights? What were the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964? 3. What legislation did President Johnson sponsor to eliminate poverty? What other major reforms did Johnson sponsor after his election in 1964? 4. What were the issues in the 1968 presidential campaign? Whot factors contributed to the Republican victory? 5. What was President Nixon's plan to reform the welfare system? What was the reaction in Congress toword the proposal? 6. What other legislation did Nixon sponsor? Which did Congress approve? The Domestic Scene Is Troubled Inflation arouses concern. The threat of inflation posed a serious problem throughout the 1960's, as the cost of living inched upward. Government efforts to wipe out poverty and at the same time to wage war in Southeast Asia strained the nation's economy. Under the two Democratic Presidents, Congress had appropriated large sums for the country's economically depressed areas, for decaying cities, and for the antipoverty program. One result of this vast government spending was a drop in the unemployment rate — from 6 per cent in 1960 to 3.5 per cent in 1969. But during this same period, the cost of living rose. When workers demanded higher wages, the cost of these wage increases was usually passed on to the consumer in the form of higher prices. Nixon labeled inflation the "most unfair tax of all." He hoped to curb the rising cost of living without increasing unemployment. His plan was to trim government spending and to have the Federal Reserve Board slow business spending by raising the interest rate. By the end of 1970, there was a definite slowdown in the economy. Consumers reduced their spending, business profits declined, and thousands of workers lost their jobs. Early in 1971 unemployment had again reached 6 per cent. Meanwhile, prices were still increasing at the rate of 5 per cent a year. Critics held that the Nixon administration had created a recession and increased unemployment, without curbing inflation. Wage and price increases feed inflation. Each of the Presidents in the 1960's took an interest in new contracts negotiated between labor unions and management. They argued that increased wages and benefits for workers should come from profits made possible by increased productivity, not by charging consumers higher prices. In 1962 the major steel companies and the United Steelworkers signed a noninflationary contract which President Kennedy praised as an example of "industrial statesmanship." When the steel companies then tried to increase prices, Kennedy sharply denounced the action, and the companies canceled the increases. President Johnson influenced the aluminum and copper industries to cancel price increases, and President Nixon persuaded the steel companies to reduce proposed [n ice increases in 1971. In each case, the President was acting as a watchdog to protect the public interest. It was neither possible nor wise for the federal government to supervise all new contracts. Nor did any of the chief executives wish to impose price and wage controls. As the 1960's progressed, inflationary settlements increasingly seemed the o y way of ending bitter strikes. The d hard hit by the rising cost of living, receiv demands from municipal employees ° steep wage increases. Although many ci had laws prohibiting strikes by w ployces, this legislation was diffic'1 enforce. Firemen, policemen, sanl workers, teachers, transportation " ^ and hospital personnel cither walk on strike, or threatened to do so ^ administrations usually were force 0 render and to pass on the increased costs to the public in the form of higher taxes. Many workers face job insecurity. Union members expected their officials to secure wage increases and to protect their job security. By installing automated machinery, employers could cut production costs and could compete more effectively with foreign producers. A growing number of jobs were thus becoming obsolete. There was no easy solution to the problems caused by automation. Union officials often played important roles in negotiating settlements between workers and employers. Some industries used the savings from automation to provide earlier retirement for workers and thus reduce the work force. Some companies introduced programs to train younger workers for new jobs. Because some industries were unable to work out acceptable solutions, prolonged strikes resulted. Difficult problems confront organized labor. The issue of corruption within the unions was revived in the 1960's by the long duel between the federal government and James Iloffa, president of the Teamsters (page 794). After years of legal action to reverse lower court rulings, Hoffa went to prison in 1967. Meanwhile, there was growing friction within the AFL-CIO between the craft unions and industrial unions. Walter Reuther, AFL-CIO vice-president until 1967 and head of the auto workers' union, was disturbed to see the labor force constantly expanding while trade union membership remained stationary. He wanted the AFL-CIO to reach all unorganized workers, from migrant laborers to "white collar" professionals. But in 1970 Reuther died in an airplane accident before achieving these objectives. George Meany, president of the AFL- CIO and spokesman for the craft unions, was more interested in wage increases and job security for present union members than in the recruitment of new members from minority groups. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited racial discrimination by unions working on federally financed projects. But the construction workers' unions were reluctant to open their apprenticeship programs to applicants from minority groups. Angry blacks and Puerto Ricans picketed federal construction sites in Philadelphia. New York, Pittsburgh, and Chicago. Union leaders, contractors, and federal mediators finally worked out a program for admitting more nonwhites to union membership in the building trades. Despite such progress, however, some unions and employers still continued discriminatory practices against minority groups. Southern universities are desegregated. In the fall of 1962, James Meredith, Cesar Chavez, head of the United Farm Workers, led his fellow Mexican Americans in a five-year boycott against the grape growers in California. 