Opposition to the foreign born. The immigration that struck the Atlantic coast like a tidal wave created irritations in addition to benefits. The immigrants were often resented as foreigners. They were condemned, too, because they sometimes needed financial assistance after they landed. In the seven years from 1847 to 1854 alone, 617,000 immigrants were aided in New York City by charity amounting to $2,250,000. Many Americans insisted that European countries were sending us their paupers and criminals. Philip Hone, onetime mayor of New York, wrote in his diary: "All Europe is coming across the ocean; all that part at least who cannot make a living at home; and what shall we do with them? They increase our taxes, eat our bread, and encumber our streets, and not one in twenty is competent to keep himself.'' Contributions of the newcomers. This anti- immigrant feeling was not universal. Many citizens could see that immigrants, especially those with families, became valuable consumers as soon as they landed. The new arrivals thereby greatly expanded the American home market for goods of all kinds. It was recognized, too, that the immigrants brought capital with them. It was usually a small sum per person, but even if the average was only $40, the tide of the 1850's meant that $100,000,000 in new capital helped to enrich America. But most of all, immigrants brought to this country a willingness to join their brains and • strength in a combined effort with earlier t*ielf f t0 fulfill the aspirations of all Americans. Earning a Living In 1850 the middle Atlantic states were producing enough food for their own needs. Also, were able to sell surplus wheat to other sections. Until 1850 more sheep were raised here (ban in any other section of the nation. Both New York and Pennsylvania were producing great quantities of cattle until the eve of the Civil War. The dairy products—milk, butter, cheese—produced in New York in 1850 were double the amount of those of Ohio, which ranked as second-largest producer in the Union. Mining and heavy industry. Yet even by 1850 it was clear that mining and heavy industry would soon transform the section. In New York and New Jersey, mining was insignificant; but Pennsylvania led all the states of the country in coal extraction. Pennsylvania in 1850 was producing half of the nation's pig iron. Sixty percent of the wrought iron of the country was manufactured in these three states. While New England introduced modern factory organization in the textile industry, the middle Atlantic states created the modern diversified corporation for producing iron. The Cambria Iron Works of Johnstown, Pennsylvania, by 1850 covered about 25,000 acres and had its own supplies of limestone, coal, clay, and ore. Its furnaces could produce 800 tons of pig iron per week. We were not yet in the steel age, but the availability of coal and its nearness to iron ore made Pennsylvania ideally suited to lead the way to the new era. International commerce. The middle Atlantic states dominated the country's foreign commerce by 1850. At the beginning of the 1840's, New York's total merchant-marine tonnage and foreign-ship arrivals surpassed Boston's for the first time and were never thereafter challenged. This woodcut, "The Lure of American Wages," was published in 1 855. The building called Castle Garden, shown at the upper left, was the reception center at New York City for immigrants of the time. Courtesy Museum of the City of New York The Homestead Act, passed in 1862, also played an important part in the growth of prosperity. It encouraged western settlement, which, in turn, created a demand for farm—to say nothing of railroad—equipment. The Effect on People The development of large-scale industry greatly changed the lives of most Americans. Riches came to some, disaster to others. Cities grew both in size and in number, bringing new advantages and new problems. New millionaires. Fortunes were made not only by those who had invested in the new industrial enterprises but also by the hundreds of men who shared in government contracts for military supplies. A newspaper reported during the war that there were already in New York alone "several hundred men worth $1,000,000 and some worth $20,000,000 while twenty years back there had not been five men in the whole United States worth as much as $5,000,000 and not twenty worth over $1,000,000." The plight of the little businessman. The small businessman was finding it difficult to compete with his larger rival. He lacked the funds for expanding his factory or for purchasing new machinery to make his plant more efficient. He usually did not have the political influence used by his bigger competitors to secure profitable government contracts. Besides, they were able to undersell him and drive him out of business. He seemed to be waging a constantly losing battle against them. Up the ladder of success. But there was opportunity in this generation of industrial expansion for some of the most humble to climb to great riches. Cornelius Vanderbilt was the son of a struggling ferryboat worker. Andrew Carnegie, an immigrant, began his career as a bobbin boy in a cotton factory, earning $1.20 per week. Jay Gould started his business life as a blacksmith's helper. Furthermore, the standard of living was improving for everybody, and the diligent man could hope for a better tomorrow. Said the son of an Irish immigrant, who rose to prominence as a lawyer in New York: "In worn-out, king- ridden Europe men must stay where they are born. But in America a man is accounted a failure, and certainly ought to be, who has risen above his father's station in life." New hands from Europe. These were encou aging sentiments for the people on the other sij of the Atlantic to hear. Inventors were soon filling special urban needs. For communicating faster and oftener, there was Alexander Graham Bell's telephone, which first appeared in 1876. To provide better illumination, there was Thomas A. Edison's incandescent electric light, which was first successfully demonstrated in 1879. Although the effects of these inventions were felt throughout the world in a few years, the immediate result was a quickening of American city life. It became gayer and more alluring—and more exhausting. In the South, industry and consequently urbanization developed more slowly. Nevertheless, in 1880 Alabama produced 347,000 tons of iron, and there were 500,000 cotton spindles in Georgia and North and South Carolina. The phrase "the new' South" was coined to describe the transformation of the section from its former exclusive reliance on the raising of staple crops. Thus, conditions in post-Civil War America were ripe for the development of large-scale industry. Now that the Union had been saved, manufacturers could count on a national market. New demands for comforts, coming from the cities, especially, created new products. There was enough capital for investment, and enough labor to supply the factories. The government had shown an intention to provide helpful legislation. What the United States now required was an adequate means of distributing the country's finished goods. The obvious answer was more railroads. Do You Know the Basic Facts? 1. How did Andrew Carnegie justify large-sized industrial undertakings? 2. Who started the first American factory? When? 3. What was meant by the "American method"? What was its advantage? 4. Who supplied funds for our industrialization? 5. How did the Civil War affect it? 6. What four laws aided industry? 7. How was the little businessman affected by expanding industry? 8. What percent of our population in 1880 was foreign-born? 9. Give the good and bad effects of the developing urbanization. 10. What inventions helped to satisfy urban needs? 1 1. What need developed as industrialization increased after the Civil War? engaging in a conspiracy to restrain trade. The Supreme Court upheld the company's view, and the individual members of the union had to pay the heavy damages provided for in the law. Radical Movements: the I.W.W. A small fraction of the labor force tried to bring about revolutionary changes in American life. The most important of these extreme radical* were the Industrial Workers of the World, usually known as the "I.W.W." or "wobblies."10 This organization, which was formed in 1905, rejected alike craft unionism and the "go-slow" policies of the AF of L. The I.W.W. opposed political activity but advocated industrial strife leading to the destruction of the American system of enterprise. Its method was to rely on the boycott; on sabotage, that is, the malicious destruction of the employer's property; and on strikes. Although the I.W.W.'s membership on the eve of the First World War was probably less than 100,000, its appeal was strong among lumbering men, migratory farm laborers, western miners, and others whose conditions of work were bound to make them discontented. Do You Know the Basic Facts? 1. Name the reasons why laboring men decided to form a national organization. 2. Name the first such organization, and give its history 3 Who were the Molly Maguires? 4. Name and describe important labor disputes in 1877 5 What was the public's attitude toward them! 6. What people joined the Knights of Labor? 7. What was the Knights' program? What were their methods? 8. What event hurt the Knights and why? 9. Name other reasons for their decline. 10. How did the AF of L differ from the Knights? 1 1. What was the AF of L's main contribution? What were its methods? 1 2. How did employers try to halt the growth of unions? 13. Describe two strikes in which the federal government accepted the position of the employers. 14. What attitude did the courts show toward labor? Give two examples. 15. Who were the I.W.W.'s? A Rising Tide of Foreigners Alarms Labor Leaders Businessmen often blamed the immigrants who flocked here after the Civil War for the appearance in the United States of anarchistic and socialistic ideas. Labor leaders, on the other hand, complained that immigrants not only worked more cheaply than Americans but served gladly as strikebreakers. These were harsh, unfair judgments of people whose strength and numbers were indispensable in the growth of American industry. So-called "New Immigration" After 1880, as industrialization increased in northern Europe, immigration from that region to this country declined markedly. A wave of newcomers now began to enter the United States from southern and eastern Europe—Italians, Slovaks, Hungarians, Romanians, Serbs, Russians, 10 The origin of this nickname is not clear. Some have said that it comes from Chinese laborers' attempts to pronounce "I.W.W." as "I wobbly, wobbly," Critics of the movement amused themselves by saying the letters stood for "I won't work." Greeks, Poles. This so-called "new immigration" was usually contrasted with the so-called "old immigration"—from England, Ireland, Scotland, Germany, and Scandinavia. Opponents of unrestricted immigration considered the eastern Europeans to be clannish, too inclined to remain in the large cities, and generally undesirable. But if they had read pre-Civil War newspapers and magazines, they would have seen that the same things were being said about the so-called "old immigration" when it was first arriving! Numbers. Actually there was only one thing new about the immigration—aside, of course, from its source: it was more numerous than ever in the past. Between 1880 and 1900 six million came to America, and by 1914 about twelve million more. In one peak year alone—1882—about 800,000 immigrants arrived. In the earlier immigration of the 1840's and 1850's, when thousands left their homes in Europe (particularly Ireland and Germany, because of crop failures, famine, HHhHI Brown Brothers 'r: A family of immigrants, carrying their few possessions, arrives in New York City in 1890. and political persecution), a peak of 400,000 had been reached only once. Many Americans were frankly alarmed at the size of this mass of humanity. Could so many foreigners become Americanized? Or were they going to undermine the nation? They were often misunderstood. Understanding the ways of the newcomers. One must remember, first of all, that the immigrants contributed to their adopted country at least as much as they received. They were consumers as soon as they stepped ashore, and their brawn and talents notably enriched American life. Second, if they read newspapers written in a foreign language it was a sign of their becoming Americanized, not of their clannishness. In the old country they probably had not read a newspaper at all! Third, if they flocked to the cities rather than to farms, Americans in these years were doing the same; opportunity was greater there. Fourth, if they lived more cheaply than the people who had been born here, it usually was because they were under pressure to scrimp and save in order to bring their families over as soon as possible. Fifth, in unskilled jobs, it is true, they may have been willing to work more cheaply than Americans. Yet they quickly discovered that wages have to be determined by the cost of living —which was no different for the immigrant than for the native. Sixth, although various brands of socialism and anarchism had been introduced by immigrants from Germany, Italy, and Russia, the large majority of the newly arrived were conservatives. "Welcome to all!" And besides, the immigrants' energies were taken up in establishing homes and supporting families. They had come here to adapt themselves to, not change, American ways. Restriction. Resentment against the newcomers from eastern Europe was sometimes intense. But attempts to restrict immigration were directed mainly against Asians. A Chinese Exclusion Act was passed in 1882 as the result of demands from the Pacific-coast states. A gentleman's agreement with Japan was concluded in 1907, which kept out Japanese laborers without formal Congressional action. Yet, in general, the American policy until the First World War was "Come, all who will." The Door to Opportunity Despite labor's difficulties and sorrows between 1865 and 1914, its leaders never lost hope that tomorrow would be better. Their optimism was well founded: wages were advancing, and the workday was being shortened. This land offered a rising standard of living even to those who, in Jefferson's phrase, "worked at a bench." Industrialization, for all the evils it brought, opened wide and promising horizons for factory workers—as well as for factory owners. Europeans and Americans alike knew that the words of Emma Lazarus inscribed on the Statue of Liberty, dedicated in 1886, were not empty ones: . . . Give me your tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door! Do You Know the Basic Facts? 1. Why did businessmen and labor leaders often criticize immigrants after the Civil War? 2. How did immigration change after 1880? 3. How were the immigrants misunderstood? 4. What restrictions were made? They were chiefly against whom? The Workshop po You Know? Use this list of names to help you review the chapter: John Mitchell "yellow-dog contract" craft unions injunction Mechanics' Union of walkout Trade Associations boycott National Trades' Union picketing Commonwealth v. Hunt Homestead strike Brook Farm Pullman strike National Labor Union Eugene V. Debs William Sylvis Lochner v. New York Molly Maguires Muller v. Oregon Knights of Labor Danbury Hatters Case Uriah S. Stephens contract Terence V. Powderly I.W.W. Haymarket affair "new immigration" Samuel Gompers Chinese Exclusion Act AF of L gentleman's agreement Allan Pinkerton Recognizing Cause-and-Effect Relationships 1. Look at the population table on page 703 in the Appendix. In what decade of the nineteenth century did the urban population in the United States increase approximately 100 percent? What were the percents of increase by decades in the fifty years that followed? Note the rate of population increase of the ten largest cities in these decades (see "Cities" in the Index to locate the charts giving this information). 2. In what part of the nineteenth century did large-scale industry begin to develop? 3. Turn to the table in the Appendix showing immigration to the United States by decades, 1821-1950. In what decades in the nineteenth century did the number of immigrants show the greatest increases? The first decrease in immigration came at the end of which decade? 4. When did labor begin to organize on a nationwide scale? In what decades was labor trouble especially serious? 5. To what extent did increasing urbanization, the growth of large-scale industry, the mounting rate of immigration, and the nationwide organization of labor (together with accompanying labor trouble) parallel each other in time? 6. What association or relationship can you see between the first two? Between the first, second, and third? Can you see a cause-and- effect relationship between any of the four? Why must one be careful not to assume that because events or movements take place about the same time, they must be related to each other or one must be the cause of the other? Student Activities 1. Draw a political cartoon dealing with some subject connected with the labor movement in the nineteenth or early twentieth century, such as: (a) the attitude of the courts as shown in any legal decision of the period; (b) the issue in one of the major strikes; (c) the Knights of Labor versus the American Federation of Labor; (d) the policies of the I.W.W.; (e) restricted versus unrestricted immigration. Give your cartoon an appropriate caption. Post the cartoons, pairing those that show opposing views of an issue or event. In which of the cartoons is caricature used most effectively? What other cartoon techniques are used? 2. Have a class committee plan a series of oral reports on what it considers the most important developments and personalities of the labor movement in the period of history discussed in this chapter. Use general reference books and books listed in the Part Five Book Shelf. 3. Bring to class newspaper or magazine articles on current labor conditions or problems. Report on them and make a bulletin-board display. How do these problems or conditions compare with those of the period from 1865 to 1914? ruined this world before passing it on to us. . . . They give us this thing knocked to pieces, leaky, red-hot, threatening to blow up; and then they are surprised that we don't accept it with the same attitude of pretty, decorous enthusiasm with which they received it, way back in the 'eighties." Young people took pride in being rebellious. Often callously disregarding traditional moral behavior, they enjoyed the nickname "flaming youth." Emphasis on recreation. Third, leisure—the sweetest fruit of the Industrial Revolution—was changing our national outlook. Hard work had once been the greatest of American virtues; in the twenties leisure was also becoming a goal of life for millions. Vacations were playing an important part in people's plans for their private lives. The working day was growing significantly shorter, with the eight-hour day becoming the aim of the labor movement. "Take it easy," were the words friends now commonly used when they said good-by to each other. In this kind of atmosphere, recreation loomed larger and larger. It was no longer incidental to a hard day in office or factory; for many, it had become, in thought if not yet in duration, the most important part of the day. A stepped-up pace. Fourth, the development of tabloid newspapers1 and of the radio made it possible to arouse keen national excitement over a particular aspect of life and then abruptly switch it to something else. This no doubt helped to create the impression that the pace of American life was speeding up and that every year it was faster than the previous year. Jazz music, which captured the fancy of Americans in the 1920's, was an excellent symbol of this new spirit. Jazz was usually played in a more excited tempo than traditional melodies, and its beat was decidedly unconventional. A mask for problems. Fifth, there seemed to be a sense that darker times might lie ahead. The world war had provided a glimpse into what the 1 The tabloids are generally smaller in size and shape than ordinary newspapers. Thev specialize in carrying photographs— often of a sensational kind. Farmers lost much of their isolation from national life after the development of radio. This farmer of 1920 is listening to a crystal set—an early kind of radio. Brown Brother future might hold. There was a feeling of having to enjoy oneself before it was too late. Americans seemed also to be afraid to carry the world responsibility that had now fallen to them. Many seemed to be behaving like Peter Pan, "the boy who would not grow up." Beneath the revelry and joyfulness there lurked problems that Americans were trying to avoid. Closing the Gates to Immigrants A notable development of the twenties was the movement to restrict immigration—a reversal of our traditional policy. Actually, the interest in closing the door had long been active. For a number of reasons, restriction now became popular among Americans. Some explanations. First of all, large-scale unemployment occurred after the war. Immigrants who had come from eastern Europe in a steady torrent before 1914 appeared to be displacing native Americans or earlier arrivals from their jobs. Second, when the reaction against the war set in, it was easy for us to blame foreigners for our miscarried crusade to "make the world safe for democracy"—and to turn against them. Third, it was easy to look upon foreigners as dangerous radicals in the period after 1918, when eastern Europe was threatened by the tide of Russian bolshevism—later communism. These changes in Europe brought suspicion of spies, which in turn produced fears—as one man put it —of "bewhiskered, ranting, howling, mentally- warped, law-defying aliens." Fourth, because many of the immigrants were Jewish or Catholic, it was convenient to turn hidden anti-Semitism and anti-Catholicism into antiforeignism, which was not so embarrassing to express. Fifth, because the immigrants usually became urban dwellers and strengthened the cities culturally and economically, rural communities were often resentful. Their people sometimes took the lead in the growing movement to bring to an end unrestricted immigration. Furthermore, the hatreds caused by the military hostilities themselves, the declining birth rate among the older American families, and the widespread belief that "the whole world was preparing to move to the United States" combined to arouse strong determination to keep new immigrants out. A literacy test. A notable, indirect attempt to strike at the immigrant was made by a proposal that a literacy test—calling for an ability to read and write a language—be demanded of all those seeking to enter our country. Such a bill had been vetoed by Taft in 1913 and by Wilson in 1915 and again in 1917. But Congress passed the bill over Wilson's second veto. Quota acts. It was plain that the enactment of additional anti-immigrant legislation was only a matter of time. In 1921 Congress passed the Emergency Quota Act, which restricted the admission of foreigners to 3 percent of the number of each nationality living here in 1910. Many Americans considered this law' to be unsatisfactory because the year chosen for determining the size of the quotas was one that came after the arrival of millions of eastern Europeans. Continuing to believe that the immigrants from northern and western Europe were more desirable, they brought about a change through a new law. By the Immigration Quota Act of 1924, 1890 became the base year. The ratio was reduced from 3 percent to 2 percent. As soon as possible, the people living here in 1920, descended from immigrants from the various countries, were to be counted. The 2-percent quotas w'ere then to be based on those figures. In 1927 all immigration was reduced to 150,000 annually. To be sure, there were some, like ex-President Charles W. Eliot of Harvard, who defended unrestricted immigration wholeheartedly and asked bravely: "Is this generation to be frightened out of this noble policy by any industrial, racial, political, or religious bogies?" But for the time being, at least, the tide was running hard against his way of thinking. The Fear of Radicals By the end of 1919, events occurring abroad were convincing many Americans that the world as they knew' it was fast disappearing and that they were in deadly danger. German Communists for a few days were able to hold the city of Berlin; Communists ruled Hungary for five months; there was serious unrest in Italy; and in India, nationalists W'ere making new' problems for the British. Here at home it did not relax American nerves to learn that a well-known anti-Communist had received in the mail a bornb which exploded. Between 1899 and 1919 Poland was included with Austria-Hungary, Germany, and Russia. Includes Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Switzerland, France, Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey in Europe, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and other European Gantries not elsewhere classified. Also includes Austria-Hungary for 1861-1904; Austria, 1905-1937, 1946-1950; Hungary, 1905-1950; Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia, 1920-1950. 