Straight at the tepees and into the breastwork he charged, slashing off the head of a Crow warrior as he broke through. He wheeled about, charging into the thick of them again, working havoc where his sword fell. The Crows shot, but missed and missed. Then our people saw Two Twists disappear among them in hand-to-hand struggle. Then the Cheyenne charged into the Crows, killing them on all sides. Red Robe's wife charged with an ax. Wherever she found a Crow dead or wounded, she split his skull to smear the blood of the enemy upon her face and arms . . . Two Twists was not killed, and from his deeds he derived the greatest honor. People said he had done his work; they would never let him do it again; he need not fulfill his vow to die. Back in camp. Two Twists sent for Red Robe and his two wives and children. He himself stripped them of their mourning rags and dressed them well. Many things were given to the women, and now Red Robe took back his horses. They, too, participated in the victory joy of the camp. Red Robe went back to his lodge and in his turn sent for a crier to get Two Twists. Red Robe was accepting felicitations [congratulations] from everybody. To each person who came to greet him, he gave a horse. He painted the faces of all adult comers with black charcoal —the symbol of joy in the death of the enemy. Of all his horses he kept only a few for himself, and this time he was not stopped by the soldiers. At the end, he adopted Two Twists for his son. They argued that the location of the missiles would endanger the lives of the people near the sites, since in case of war, these bases would probably become the first targets of any enemy attack. Public dissent and the refusal of Congress to spend funds for a comprehensive ABM system forced the President to accept a limited program of two missile sites far from dense population centers. To be politically effective, however, dissenters must have an audience who can influence key decision-makers. During the 1960's, dissent in the United States focused upon two issues: the civil rights movement and United States involvement in the war in Vietnam. A vital chapter in the struggle by black Americans to achieve equal rights with white Americans began with a Supreme Court decision in 1954. The Court declared segregated schools unconstitutional. In the 1960's, thousands of black Americans sought to change their political status from dissenting subjects to allegiant and dissenting participants by registering to vote in the South. Years of protest and organized demonstrations finally resulted in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. With the power of the United States government to support them, black citizens continued to demand that states obey the new laws requiring equal treatment for all people at voting places, restaurants, and hotels. At the same time, they pressed for new legislation that would provide equal treatment in all aspects of American society and would raise the quality of life for black people. Beginning in 1965 and continuing into the 1970's, thousands of Americans have protested against the Vietnam war. In April 1965, the first march on Washington D.C. protested the decision of the Johnson administration to escalate American involvement by increasing the U.S. troop commitment in South Vietnam and by bornbing North Vietnam. Days before this protest rally in Washington D.C., a group of dissenters devised an unusila| technique for getting their views heard. A group of university professors questioned decisions the government had made about the war in Vietnam. They wanted to present the "facts" surrounding the problem and to look at and to debate conflicting views of its solution. To do this, they devised a technique called a teach-in. On March 24, 1965, some 200 members of the University of Michigan's faculty and 12,000 students attended a night-long rally to discuss and debate United States policy in Vietnam. Within weeks, the teach-in movement had spread to campuses all over the country. Hundreds of professors and students participated in all-night discussions. On May 15, a national teach-in took place at a Washington hotel with closed-circuit radio relaying the debate to 110 campuses. A nationwide audience of over 100,000 persons heard the program. After the formal presentation had been completed, they continued with all-night sessions of their own. The teach-in, conceived as a forum for both sides of the controversy, invited top-level government officials to engage in debate with college professors, some of whom disagreed violently with government policy. But even a democracy must limit dissension or chaos may result. Dissenters may disagree with the decisions their leaders make, but they do not challenge the government's authority to make decisions. They may disagree with the Supreme Court's judgment that separate school facilities cannot be equal, but they do not stand in the way of officials authorized to enforce this judgment. They may disagree about the wisdom of the government's right to make foreign policy. They do not, however, give secret information about foreign affairs to enemy agents. They are dissenters, but they are not alienated from the entire system. The term alienation has been used to describe many different kinds of behavior. Those citizens who do not vote and play no role in the political process are said to be alienated. In a system built around the belief that control of the government should lie in the hands of citizens, the nonvoter challenges the existence of the system itself. He is acting in a way that is contrary to the system, a way that, if generally adopted, would destroy it. Not all alienated people are passive. Some decide to act out their dissatisfaction with the system. Reading 59 describes an incident that occurred in Lamar, South Carolina. It involved a group of alienated citizens. As you read, consider the following questions: 1. What happened in Lamar, South Carolina? 2. At what point can the actions of a group such as the one in Lamar no longer be considered legitimate dissent? Reporter Jon Nordheimer filed these two stories to The New York Times from Lamar, South Carolina. Gas Routs Whites Who Upset Buses at Carolina School A mob of white men stormed three school buses carrying Negro children to a newly desegregated high school here today and attempted to attack the pupils with ax handles, lengths of chain, and stones before the state police dispersed them with tear gas. Before scattering, about 200 men overturned two empty school buses and pelted the helmeted police with rocks and sticks. Several persons suffered minor injuries in the melee [fight]. Two children were cut in the face by glass when the men smashed bus windows with clubs while they were still aboard the vehicles. Governor Robert E. McNair . . . condemned the attack as "an act which defies all human reason and understanding. As deeply as we deplore this incident, we are equally appalled at those who have helped to create the type of dangerous and inflammatory public attitude which makes such an act possible. . . . We now see the consequences which result from an open defiance of the law; we now pay the penalty for the type of disrespect and disregard for authority which has been publicly advocated by many in recent days. If the safety of our children is not sacred to all men, then the entire process of law and government is meaningless." The Governor ordered the high school closed for an indefinite period. An aide said that Mr. McNair spoke by telephone twice today with Attorney General John N. Mitchell to give a report of the clash. He was told that United States marshals would be sent to the tension-torn town, where more than 100 state police were already standing guard. State troopers made the initial arrests before midnight. The accused men were placed in Darlington County jail for arraignment tomorrow before a county' magistrate. The first man arrested was Jeryl Best, a 42-year-old restaurant owner from nearby Lydia and leader of the county's local freedom-of-choice organization, which had staged a demonstration outside Lamar High School . . . shortly before the disorder began. ... Mr. Best and six other men who had been identified by the police as leaders of the disorder were subpoenaed earlier in the day to appear in federal court as the government sought a permanent injunction to bar them from further interference with the court's order to desegregate the school. The arrests came while agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and United States marshals moved into this eastern South Carolina town as the Department of Justice investigated the attack on the school buses. The school remained closed today and attendance elsewhere dropped sharply as the state police and a small contingent of the National Guard maintained order. . . . How long the peace could be [kept] appeared to rest with the police presence. Whites and blacks said they feared that violence would resume if the schools were reopened without the protection of the state troopers. . . . Mr. Best, disclaimed [denied] any involvement in the violence. "I think it's the most terrible thing I've seen," he remarked. . . . He characterized those who attacked the buses To be subpoenaed means to be legally ordered to appear in court. An injunction is an order issued by a court. Under what conditions, if any, are citizens justified in destroying private property? in threatening bodily harm to people? ► How would you feel toward a government that failed to take action against those who violated the law or did bodily harm to others? and children as "concerned citizens who lost their right way 0f thinking for a moment. ..." In an interview, Mr. Best said he wonld visit Washington soon in an attempt to place his appeal for a return of the Lamar schools to a freedom-of-choice plan before the new Presidential task force headed by Vice-President Agnew. "I definitely fee] I can get results," he said. "I definitely feel there's been a change since the Nixon administration took over." Meanwhile, many whites . . . expressed concern that new violence would erupt unless criminal charges were pressed against those who participated in yesterday's attack. "If the people who svere responsible are not indicted, we'll be living by the law of the jungle here," said Ed Hurley, a planning supervisor at the local American Can Company plant. How should the political system deal with people wrho behave like the group at Lamar? The actions of the mob in Lamar, South Carolina, challenged the ideology of the American political system. The members of the mob replaced the rule of law with terror and violence. American ideology stresses respect for each individual and the views he holds. The system cannot tolerate men who turn to violence to impose their opinions on others. In the Soviet political system, the individual is less important than the group. Soviet ideology stresses collective welfare. Soviet leaders believe that the institution of private property turns men against each other. The interests of those who "have inevitably conflict with the interests of those who "have not. According to the Communists, conflict between men will cease only when society abolishes the institution of private property and man's greed for individual profit ends. 320 