Over most of these pre-Columbian explorers hangs a heavy cloud of myth, pierced by a few rays of historical fact. Several archaeologists argue that Polynesian sloops or Japanese fishing boats or Chinese junks first brought people to the American continent. Other scholars believe that if a recently translated inscription found in Brazil is genuine, it proves that a boatload of Jews or Phoenicians sailed here from the Red Sea as early as the sixth century b.c, Irish folklore insists that Saint Brendan steered westward in the sixth century a.d, and found the J9ew World, but, homesick for the Emerald Isle, sailed right back into martyrdom. Not to be outdone, the Welsh assert that certain archaeological remains in the American South indicate that the legendary Prince Madoc not only sailed from Wales to the New World in 1170 but even founded colonies here. One Italian professor insists that the Etruscans took time out from governing the Po Valley to discover America in 1100 b.c. The most believable claim for European penetration of the Western Hemisphere before Columbus involves the Vikings. These Scandinavian adventurers (also called Norsemen) were courageous seamen. In the ninth century they established a settlement in Iceland. From this base of operations they conducted daring voyages of exploration farther westward. Vikings led by Eric the Red discovered and settled Greenland during the tenth century. Around the year 1000 Eric's son Leif anchored his ship off the coast of what is now Newfoundland. He called the place Vineland the Good, and he and his men spent the winter there before returning to Greenland. A decade later, other The Plantation Colonies William Berkeley never stopped complaining that Nathaniel Bacon was a recent immigrant a man who had been in Virginia for less than two! years when he became a rebel and mutineer. Most important, they said try raising a cash crop that was not grown liEngland rice, for example, or sugar or citrus init The merchants at home in England could mu import the crop at a profit. The colonists ti9d the Indians) would, in turn, buy from the immigrants such necessities as cloth, tools, nails, furniture. If their colony worked out as the cap is one raided in quantities lo sell for income. Finally, they chose a point of land about thirty miles up the river that they had already named after King James. They landed and unloaded their supplies. Their settlement, too, they named after the king: James Fort, or Jamestown. Things went smoothly at first, and after about seven weeks the leaders of the colony sent back their first report to the Royal Council for Virginia. The report complained a little but presented a generally optimistic picture—the kind that was to lure thousands of other Englishmen over the Atlantic in the coming years. In this pleasant land, the colonists reported, they had already accomplished the first tasks of planting: "Within less than seven weeks, we are fortified well against the Indians. We have sown good store of wheat. We have sent you a taste of clapboard.2 We have built some houses." The only note of caution in the first report was a request that new supplies and people be sent as quickly as possible, lest the "devouring Spaniard lay his ravenous hands upon these gold-showing mountains." This was the Englishmen's "Virginia." For the king it was a vast region with enormous possibilities for the crown and the nation. For the merchants it was an investment that could By "a taste of clapboard." the writer meant a -small amount of split oak (used for making barrels). Ijan Winlhrop wax a man of refinement amid sensitivity. I hush some questioned his arbitrary rulings (he hud in democracy), none doubted his integrity. Then we lacked and stood west-southwest. We hail now fair, sunshine weather, and so pleasant a sweet air as did much refresh us. And there * came a smell off the shore like the smell of a garden. There came a wild pigeon into the ship, and another small land bird. I!look four more days to reach port, a small settlement called Nahumkeck. (The town was later renamed Salem.) The governor was /99 John Winthrop. and he was the head of the Massachusetts Bay Company. He and several hundred other Englishmen had come to Massachusetts Bay to establish the second important English colony in North America. Winthrop and the colonists he governed were known as Puritans. They created in New England a distinctive set of communities. It was a strict, intensely religious society that finally became the setting for the witchcraft episode of 1692. Some weeks before he caught sight of the Maine coast, Winthrop had assembled his fellow passengers on the Arhella. He then delivered a lecture on why they had left their homes and were coming to New England. He did not mention the kinds of reasons a Virginian might have given, such as gold or trade with the Indies. Instead, he claimed, he and his followers were embarked on a religious mission—"To serve the Lord and work out our salvation under the power and purity of his holy ordinances." If they succeeded, Winthrop promised them: Wc shall tind that the God of Israel is among us. When ten of us shall be able to resist a thousand of our enemies, when he shall make us a praise and glory, men shall say of succeeding plantations: "May the Lord make it like that of New England." Wc must consider that we shall be as a City upon a Hill; the eyes of all people are upon us. The Arhella was the lead ship of a fleet of seventeen that brought over 1,000 settlers. In the next ten years 20,000 more came. By 1640 a string of Puritan towns stretched up and down the coast from Boston. No doubt many of the settlers and even more of their servants came for land or adventure. But basically, this great migration was a religious movement, a crusade. The migrants were escaping from an England they believed was powerfully corrupt. They Thomas Hutchinson, a loyal servant of the crown, moved to England in 1774 and never returned to America. The frustrations and squabbling in the Eleventh Ward were more than matched by bloody events that occurred in the Sixth Ward. This district was strongly pro-Jackson. It was nicknamed the officeholders' because of the many Democratic politicians and public officials lived there. The ward also included many Irish Catholics, a good - Turn many Hall in 1830 stood on Nassau Sired near City Hall. Later the building was enlarged anti modernized to serve as the offices of the New York Sun. one of the city's biggest newspapers. portion of them recent immigrants. Politicking was serious business in the Sixth, and arguments between political partisans had broken out even before the polls opened. Fistfights between small groups of men punctuated the first morning of voting. Early in the afternoon a crowd collected in front of Masonic Hall the Whig party's campaign headquarters in the ward. Several members of the crowd brandished clubs, and a few carried knives. Most of them simply waved their fists in the air angrily. Suddenly, without warning, the mob surged forward into the Whig office, knocking down anyone who resisted or failed to get out of the way fast enough. Down went all the Whig banners. A bonfire of printed Whig ballots2 soon blazed Everything breakable in the room became a pile of debris. The attackers had felled about twenty men, and one of them lay dying. 11 he incidents in the Sixth and Eleventh wards, along with minor disruptions in other parts of the city, convinced Whigs that fraud and violence were destroying the democratic process. They felt too that the immigrant Irish bore the blame for much of the corruption and mayhem. Voters in 1834 did not have to register at a specified time before election day. as they do today. Under these circumstances it was much [ easier for a person who did not meet the residency requirements to voters fraudulently. Democratic voting inspectors were lenient. They gait ballots to many aliens who had not even filed papers indicating their intention to apply for citizenship. The Whigs were by no means above such cheating. If it had bets to their advantage, they would probably have committed similar abuses on election day. But the political loyalties of most immigrants in New York City, especially the Irish and Germans, went to the Democratic party. Resolved: That, in order to preserve the peace of the city, and especially of the Sixth Ward, the friends of the Constitution and the liberties of the citizen will I meet at this place (Masonic Hall) at half-past seven o'clock a.m.. and repair to the I Sixth Ward poll for the purpose of keeping it open for all voters, until such time I a the official authorities shall procure a sufficient number of special constables to lap the peace. Some Whigs wanted even stronger action. One of them was James Webb, a newspaper editor and an ex-Democrat turned rabid hater. He called for 300 well-armed men to appear at Masonic / 251 Masonic Hall, on Broadway between Duane anti Pearl streets, looked like this in 18.10. Note, on tile neighboring building, an awning pulled over the sidewalk to protect pedestrians from the sun. Hall at six in the morning. Webb said nothing about his specific plans, but he obviously intended to bring "peace" on the "Bloody Sixth" by force if necessary. hortly after daybreak on Wednesday, April 9. Whigs began assembling. More men than Webb had asked for came, most of them armed. After holding a rally to instill this force with the proper spirit Webb marched 200 of the vigilantes to City Hall. Apparently impressed by this show of force, city officials relented. The sheriff swore in the men as special constables and issued them badges. The newly appointed "peace officers" hurried immediately to the Sixth Ward. Webb, who had served several years as an army officer, tool charge. He told an unfriendly crowd that the events of the day before made the presence of the citizens' posse necessary. He announced that j no man's legal rights would be interfered with. Force would be used to preserve the peace and keep the polls open. The crowd muttered heaved a few stones, and threw some punches at the constables. By early afternoon, however, voters had free access to the polling station. Webb's men had formed double lines at both the entrance and exit ot the building. Several "fierce Irishmen" were arrested, according to Whig newspaper accounts. (By this time the Whigs were assuming that all violence was the work of the Irish.) Though relative calm reigned that day. few persons expected it to continue. Webb sent some of his constables back to Masonic Hallwiti instructions to remain ready for action. That night, thousands of Democrats paraded through the streets and congregated at City Hall Pari The election had one more day to run. and the crowd wanted to the mayor and city council (then in session) how much they resented the swearing-in of the special constables. Some shouted "Down wit the Courier and Enquirer building!"—a reference to the plant on Wat Street where Webb's newspaper was printed. Two members of the council rushed downtown to warn Webb of the danger, urging him to close his office in order to avoid bloodshed. Webb replied defiantly that he had not asked the city council for protection, nor did he intend ia Though he normally closed at 10 P.M, he vowed to stay open indefinitely, with lights blazing. He had with him thirty young men. at supplied with pistols, muskets, and plenty of ammunition. Five loads of paving stones lay on the roof of the building, ready to be dropped <m rioters' heads. Back at the park, meanwhile, the crowd heard more speeches aa! then began to move down William Street toward Wall. Webb closed his doors and waited. It was such activities, they felt, that had led to the financial panics of 1819 and 1837. Many Jacksonians—workers, farmers, and middle-class Americans were still reeling from the effects of the past crisis. They hoped to restore a currency system based almost entirely on gold and silver. Some of them wanted to eliminate paper money altogether. \sVan Buren's first term drew to a close, the I Whigs marshaled their forces to unseat the Dem- is. They had the support of most wealthy deans. They also appealed to numerous vot- ® among the middle class and working people. "me working people voted Whig out of fear or ed of immigrants, who were mainly Irish German Catholics and Democrats. In ad- m. the Whig party attracted business inter- ms concerned with economic and social expan- >. Rejecting Jacksonian fears about panics nd paper money, these Whigs argued that the try needed more economic development. |lbey wanted more roads, canals, and railroads, more credit for investors. Governments, in- ling the federal government, should play a lore active role in spurring development for the fit of all. The Whigs smelled victory in the president election of 1840. Their factions seemed unit- si Besides. Van Buren. as the President in office, tad io shoulder the responsibility for the depression. He had warned that "all communities are ip to look to government for too much." This itive attitude toward federal power did not his search for votes. In fact, everything that Ian Buren touched (or tried to avoid) in 1840 irame controversial. Many Southerners at- ed him for refusing to annex Texas after Courier Chicago Historical Society Tyler, photographed some ten years after lie served as President, lived the life of a Virginia country gentleman after his term of office expired. American settlers there had set up an independent republic (see Chapter 16). Many Northerners regarded him as "soft" on slavery. Actually. Van Buren was trying to keep the slavery issue out of national politics. But ardent politicians both South and North (people like Calhoun and Adams) had other plans. 302/ Slaves on sugar plantations sverc driven very hard. Daring the harvest season, many worked Irani sixteen to eighteen hours a day. seven days a week. received special treatment from his original owner. But Turner had no rights that any white person was bound to respect. Belief in the inferiority of blacks was common among almost all Southern (and Northern) whiles, whatever their class. This universal sense of white supremacy blurred the sharp contrast between the South's democratic political system and its rigid economic structure, controlled by a few. Planters and poor whites, if they shared nothing else, still felt a common concern for maintaining slavery and the white racial unity it represented. Slavery influenced status in another way. Some nonslaveholding white farmers managed to purchase blacks, and a few even broke into the planter ranks. When this happened, it bolstered the prevailing belief among white Southerners that only an economy run by slave labor could ensure a broad range of economic opportunity. Clearly, anxiety, outright fear, and ambition helped create a feeling among almost all Southerners that their "peculiar institution" should be retained and, if necessary, defended. One other factor reinforced the consensus. Southerners were subject to fewer outside influences and new ideas than other Americans. For one thing, most white Southerners were native-born and therefore used to the customs of their region. Only 4.4 percent of the Southern population in I860 was foreign-born, compared to 18.7 percent elsewhere in the country. Also, there were fewer big cities in the South than in other sections. Even places like Norfolk and Richmond were little more than overgrown country towns. The vibrant, unsettling qualities of urban life affected only a small minority. Most white Southerners lived on farms, plantations, or in small towns such as Jerusalem. The bulk of the South's free blacks, however, did live in towns and cities— where they were closely watched and their movements rigidly supervised. Cities thus remained the most obvious breeding ground of discontent with the slave system. And free blades were clearly the most dangerous element within the closed world of slave society. The Treatment of Slaves The conditions under which slaves lived varied considerably. They could be treated relatively mildly and with consideration. Nat Turner, for instance, said that he was well-treated by both his original owner and Joseph Travis. But savagely harsh practices prevailed on rice and sugar plantations in the Deep South. Slaves from other regions of the South were sent there to be punished, as was the case after Nat Turner's Revolt. Because slaves were valuable property, an owner seldom abused them so cruelly that they died. Short of this, however, a master treated his slaves pretty much as he pleased. In times of extreme social tension, whites subjected blacks to the most degrading punishment with little fear of legal action or social criticism. Most recent scholars agree, however, that, under ordinary circumstances, slaves in the United States were generally better fed, housed, and clothed than those in Latin America during the same period. The treatment of many slaves probably did compare favorably with that of many industrial workers in the North and elsewhere—as pro- slavery people argued. (Even black rebels such as Nat Turner did not complain primarily about their economic conditions.) Some slaves were allowed to grow crops on private patches and to keep animals, for their own use or for sale. Al- 344/ Republicans, others joined the recently formed American party. Members of the party were often called "Know-Nothings." Their platform was secret, and when asked about it, a party member would answer "I know nothing." The Know-Nothings were nativisis—that is, they felt that immigrants presented a threat to "native Americans." (By "native Americans" the Know-Nothings were referring, not to Indians. but to families who had been in America for two or three generations.) Know-Nothings were particularly opposed to Roman Catholics. Hundreds of thousands of such newcomers, mainly Irish, had migrated to America in the 1840s after a potato famine in Ireland. Nativisis feared the newcomers' religion, and they felt that the Catholics would not fit into American society. Clearly, this was a time when many Americans were fearful of subversive elements in their society, elements plotting in secret to undermine democratic freedoms. Know-Nothings feared a Catholic conspiracy. Slaveholders were afraid of an abolitionist plot. And abolitionists were convinced of a slaveholders' intrigue. "Bleeding Kansas" Many people moved to Kansas after passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act. Most of them were farmers from both North and South. Few seemed to care whether the state became slave or free. Unfortunately, this unconcern did not last Antislavery Northerners formed Emigrant Aid Societies, usually under the direction of abolitionists. T^hese societies provided money, guns, and supplies for Northern settlers in Kan- sas—settlers who were determined that Kansas should be a free state. At the same time, a smaller group of proslavery settlers were backed by neighboring Missourians, who often crossed the border to vote and to fight. Armed proslavery and antislavery forces clashed fiercely in what came to be called "Bleeding Kansas." Normal political processes broke down completely. Although a large majority of Kansas settlers voted for a free-state legislature, proslavery forces and Missourians furtl cons: elected their own assembly. Violence ruled tht territory, and President Pierce could not mani-j ^ecl" tain order. The conflict reached Washington. In Mi)I 1856 Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumnerf delivered a fervent antislavery address, "tht Crime Against Kansas." His speech included as! attack on Senator Andrew Butler of South Carolina. Butler's nephew was a hotheaded South. Carolina congressman named Preston Broob. Two days after Sumner's speech, Brooks-de-l termined to avenge his family's honor marchedl into the Senate chamber and beat the Massachusetts senator unconscious with a cane. Sum-1 ner was injured so severely that he did not ap-1 pear in Congress for three years. The ! brou pron Nort Scott Miss' souri virtu was t Miss* liber and i throu prem Brooks' assault on Sumner shocked the North! owne Together with the Kansas-Nebraska Act and the! turmoil in Kansas, it helped the Republican party in the 1856 election. The first Republican! presidential candidate. General John C. Frc-| J,ni*' mont, swept all but five free slates. Southerners saw this very well. They provided the electoion majority for the new President, Pennsylvania Democrat James Buchanan. Former Whip either defected to the Republicans or supports the Know-Nothings, who ran ex-President Millard Fillmore as their candidate. The Knoi- Nothings received only eight electoral vots They declined after the 1856 campaign, and many of them joined the Republican party. By the time James Buchanan took offices President in March 1857. political parties couli no longer appeal to voters on a nationwide basis The Republicans dominated the North, but then had no following in the South. The Whig part was dead. Southern Democrats generally vote as a bloc. Only Northern Democrats were trying to bridge the widening gap between lit INebr; were Fifth privet In ot 1820 vious Kans; shock chan. TheE had h he ha [the S South) and linked regions in the interior of country. In 1831, at the time of the Nat r Revolt, there had been only 73 miles of in existence. By I860 the United States led ?world in rail transportation, with almost JIOO miles of tracks crisscrossing the nation, kn John Brown traveled east from Kansas in tlate 1850s, he went much of the way by load. By 1860 there more than 3,000 miles of canals, a network iwcrland turnpikes, and thousands of steam- its on the larger American rivers. Even small fiis in the interior, such as Harpers Ferry, sd become important transportation centers. Another change involved communications. 1861 the telegraph provided immediate con- i among Americans in every section of the airy. News of the attack on Harpers Ferry died New York City almost as quickly as it :Richmond. For that matter. John Brown id it much easier to reach a national audience :r his arrest because reporters were able to ehome their news stories. Many more Amer- js read about John Brown than about Nat raer three decades earlier, especially in the tth. where population tripled between 1830 11860. , Much of this population increase came from uail. European immigrants averaged 250.000 Bar between 1845 and I860. They came triiy from Ireland, Germany, and Scandinavia. By worked as laborers in the factories and on railroads of the Northeast. Others became m in the new states of the Middle West and West. Only a small minority went to the uh. which offered fewer opportunities for ill farmers and factory workers. For the economy was also changing. South-farmers concentrated increasingly on cotton, rn farmers, on the other hand, produced a of commercial crops for both American and foreign use. Among these were corn, wheat, and fruits and vegetables grown on truck farms. Industry too was becoming increasingly vital in the North. Manufacturing at the beginning of the nineteenth century had existed only on a small scale. Pennsylvania had a few small iron forges, for example. Massachusetts was known for handcrafted shoes. During the 1820s New England began to build a textile industry based on large-scale manufacturing, using high-speed machine tools and an expanded labor force. Manufacturing also increased elsewhere during the ante-bellum period. At the time of John Brown's raid, over 100,000 manufacturers were producing nearly $2 billion worth of such goods as textiles, clothing, pig iron, and guns (as at Harpers Ferry). By I860 the United States ranked fourth among the world's industrial powers. As the country's industry grew, so did a small organized labor movement. By mid-centu- ry industrial workers had formed a few trade unions, often against strong opposition from employers. Early unions faced formidable problems. For one thing, immigrant workers provided a constant supply of nonunion labor. For another, many native-born workers were determinedly "individualistic" (a word coined by French visitor Alexis de Tocqueville). They resented the discipline imposed by union leaders striving to reform and improve working conditions. Labor leaders were not the only Americans interested in changing society. Many wealthy businessmen also involved themselves deeply in reform activities. Throughout the ante-bellum period, in fact, the connections between economic enterprise and reform were surpisingly close. A number of prominent businessmen and landowners such as George Luther Steams and Gerrit Smith (of the Secret Six) gave much of their wealth to movements for social change. Even John Brown himself had been as single- minded in pursuit of wealth during his earlier years as he later became in his abolitionist activities. While those with money often took the lead. 416/ Richmond in .-Iprii 1865. Only llie shells of burned buildings surround llte canal basin. Lee prepared to abandon the city on April 2, ami mobs of its inhabitants set fire to the town on the eve of liis evacuation. make a fortune trading jackknives!" Industrial growth in the North began before the Civil War, of course. But it was vastly accelerated by wartime demands to equip and supply the army. The number of Northern factories increased from fewer than 140,000 in I860 to over 250,000 by 1870. Railroad mileage doubled during this decade. The growth was aided not only by government contracts for arms and military supplies. It was helped also by wartime currency inflation, huge federal subsidies to railroads, and protective tariffs for industry. The result was enormous inflation—high prices bur also tremendous profits. There was rapid expansion in industries ranging from wool production to mining, from petroleum to iron manufacturing. Farmers prospered, too, because of the increased demand for every staple crop. Most merchants and shippers shared in the boom. Banking facilities were enlarged greatly after Congress passed several new banking acts. Senator John Sherman wrote his brother General William Sherman about the impact of the war on Northern capitalists: "They talk as confidently of millions as they formerly did of thou- sands." Aristocratic George Templeton Strong complained wistfully that the more sedate prewar culture of New York City was being "dilut- ed and swamped by a great flood-tide of material wealth." A shortage of manpower on Northern farms and in factories stimulated immigration from F.urope. In 1865 alone. 180,000 new immigrants arrived on Union soil. In 1866 and 1867 the number spurted to 300,000 yearly. Perhaps most important in the North, as in the Confederacy, was the role played by the government in stimulating economic growth. Southern Democrats had dominated Congress I and the executive branch until the 1850s. They j blocked measures such as the protective tariff, a f national banking system, and railroad subsidies. I Now the Republicans were in control. They' fa- I vored industrialization and economic growth. To further their aims, they adopted the Morrill J Tariff of 1861, which raised duties. They passed | the National Banking Acts of 1863 and 1864; I these aided national banks at the expense of state I banks. In addition. Congress awarded land-grant ] subsidies to transcontinental railroads and I stimulated western settlement with the 1862 1 Homestead Act. But the proclamation did show Americans, and the rest of the world, that the Civil War was now being fought to end slavery. For all practical purposes the 3 1/2 million Hack slaves in the South found themselves free within days after Lee's surrender. It was only with final ratification of the Thirteenth Amendment, however, in December 1865, that slavery was ended completely throughout the United States. Treatment in the North. Though the Union eventually, at least—fought to free black people. He hose who lived in the North faced many differently allies. In 1860 free Northern blacks numbered in 25,000. Most of them were restricted to menial in pbs. 