RicThe Indian wars of the past should rightly be regarded as the first foreign wars of American history. As the United States marched across this continent, it was creating an empire by wars of foreign conquest just as England and France were doing in India and Africa. Certainly the war with Mexico was imperialistic, no more or less than the wars against the Sioux, Apache, Utes, and Yakimas. In every case the goal was identical; land. —Vine Deloria, Jr., Custer Died for Your Sins Three views of the United States: Is any one of them accurate? Just looking at the nation as it is today won't give you the answer. To know what the United States is and where it is going, you first must know where it has been. And where it has been is the content of American history. American history begins with the tribes of people who started coming from Asia some 25.000 years ago. Many scientists believe that for thousands of years there was a land bridge across the present Bering Strait. They think that Asians crossed it while hunting for animals or Heeing from enemies. These men, women, and children then moved southward, eventually peopling both the North and South American continents. They had many names for their tribes, but other people came to call them Indians. European migration to America started thousands of years later with colonizers from western Europe They brought their ways of life with them to the New World. They changed the land and people, but the land and people also changed them. As they land at Roanoke. English explorers come face to face with members of the Croatoan tribe. Sir Walter Raleigh began colonies on the swampy Virginia coast in the 1580's, but they failed disastrously. The first lasting colonies were Spanish. Most of them were in South or Central America, but some were in North America. Large parts of these former Spanish colonies are now within the United States. In America, the Spaniards conquered huge Indian empires, set up colonial governments, and tried to re-create Spain in America. The Spaniards at first used Indian slaves to do most of the mining and farming in New Spain. Many Indians died from the harsh conditions of slave life, however, and many escaped. Few Spanish women came to the colonies; hence most of the male colonists married Indian women. In time, their Spanish-Indian children formed a new people, mestizos, who blended Indian and Spanish cultures. African slave labor was introduced into the Spanish colonies in 1502. For the most part the Africans were brought to the islands in the Caribbean Sea, the so-called West Indies. The Africans came from a number of nations and tribes, with different languages and cultures. On the islands, people from different areas were thrown together. Since they were usually unable to speak the same language, it was difficult for them to plan together to resist enslavement. On the plantations where they worked they were forced to give up many of their old customs and to adopt European ways. As a result, much from their native cultures was lost. The English and French started colonies during the hundred years after the Africans began coming to the New World. England's settlements were founded along the eastern coast of North America, and France's to the north, west, and south of England's. Both countries also started important colonies in the West Indies. The experiences of the English and French as colonists differed from those of the Spaniards. The English at first searched for gold and tried to enslave the Indians. Since they found little gold and they were unsuccessful in their attempts at enslaving the Indians, they soon abandoned this pattern and set up farming communities. The English colonies usually were made up of European families. There was far less intermarriage with the Indians and quite a bit more warfare. Instead of incorporating the Indians into their communities, the English often pushed them out of the areas in which they were living or killed them. The French usually set up fur- trading posts or Fishing villages, and they depended on the Indians for help in trapping for furs or catching fish. Indian tribes often allied with the French or Spanish against the English. (But there were other tribes that allied themselves to the English.) Other Europeans, notably the Dutch and Swedes, also started settlements on the East Coast. These did not last as separate colonies but became parts of English America. People from other countries came to the colonies as immigrants, rather than to start their own colonies. The Scotch-Irish, Germans, Scots, French Protestants, Irish, Finns, Italians, Poles, and many others were all found in the English colonies. The earliest colonists did not look at themselves as a new people. Those from England, for example, thought of themselves simply as English people who happened to be living in North America. The English who stayed at home looked upon the colonists in the same way. As time passed, however, the colonists began to feel that they had become different, as indeed they had. By 1750, they usually considered the people of Britain and other European nations as foreigners, and those people often referred to the colonists as "Americans." New ways of life were developing in the New World. For this there were two main reasons. One was that the Americans were a mixture of nationalities. "What is the American, this new man?" asked a French nobleman, Michel Guillaume Jean de Crevecoeur, in his book. Letters from an American Farmer, published in 1782. He noted that in America a man might have an English grandfather, a Dutch wife, and a French daughter-in-law. "Here individuals of all nations are melted into a new race of men," Crevecoeur said, "whose labor and posterity will one day cause great changes in the world." A second reason for the development of a civilization that was distinctive and new was the physical environment of the colonies. Here lay great forests to be cleared and abundant land to be cultivated. The first pioneers along the coast faced many hardships and dangers. In time they developed farms and villages and later mills and towns and cities, with many of the social, religious, and political institutions common to European communities. As more and more colonists arrived and as they moved farther and farther inland, they went through a similar process of pushing out the Indians, clearing the forests, and re-creating European civilization. By 1783, a new republic of thirteen states had arisen from the thirteen English colonies on the eastern coast of North America. The way of life in these states was mainly based on ideas and customs that had been brought from the British Isles and western Europe. American society was primarily a branch of European civilization. Yet, in the course of years, a sense of "Americanness" had appeared. The development of this sense and the achievement of independence provide two of the main themes of American history in these formative years. Thirteen original colonies holders who needed workers, and thus money was provided to pay for the ocean passage. The landholder had to care for the servants during their terms of service. At the end of their terms they were free, and if they could make enough money, they too might obtain land and servants. Most indentured servants went to the middle colonies. At first, many also went to the South. In 1619, however, a Dutch ship docked at Jamestown and left twenty Negroes there. For a time these and other blacks who were brought in were held in temporary servitude like white servants, but gradually more and more Negroes began to be kept as permanent slaves. Indentured servants continued to arrive in the colonies, some even after the Revolutionary War, but after 1700, slaves rapidly replaced indentured servants on the tobacco plantations. In the rice fields of South Carolina and Georgia, Negro slavery was the rule from the start. In New England and the middle colonies, some black slaves were used as household servants or as farmhands, but they were much less numerous than in the South. During the eighteenth century many colonists came from France, Germany, and Ireland. Those from France were chiefly Huguenots, Protestants who had been denied freedom of worship at home. Those from Germany were Catholics and Protestants who had suffered from French invasions of their nation. Those from Ireland were Presbyterians whose ancestors had come from Scotland. When they disagreed with economic and religious policies, these so-called Scotch-Irish began to leave Ireland by the thousands. The colonial population grew fast, partly because of heavy immigration and partly because of a high birth rate. By 1775, the total population was more than three million. Better than 60 percent of the people were either immigrants or descendants of immigrants from England and Wales. There were more than 500,000 Africans in the colonies, 90 percent of them slaves. The rest of the people came from various European nations. A Nation of Farmers In the colonies at least 90 percent of the people made their living chiefly by farming. Some also depended on industries, and these, too, were closely related to the natural resources. Farming methods in both the colonies and Europe were crude. The farmer used a hoe, a pick, or a wooden plow drawn by oxen to break the ground. He or she sowed by hand, harvested with a sickle or scythe, and threshed grain by flailing it or having oxen trample it. Colonial farmers gave less attention to fertilizing and conserving soil than did European farmers. In North America, land was generally rich and plentiful, but labor was scarce; thus it paid to economize on labor rather than on land. Despite their more careless methods, colonial farmers produced more than their European counterparts. In New England the typical farm was so small a family could take care of it. The women grew vegetables, milked cows, tended pigs and poultry, helped harvest, and did most of the home manufacturing, such as weaving and candlemaking. The men cared for orchards, cattle, and horses and tended the fields, growing hay and corn. New Eng- landers were discouraged from growing wheat because of a plant disease, and they came to depend on the middle colonies for wheat. In the middle colonies, especially Pennsylvania, the typical farm was larger and better tilled than in New England, It yielded crops not only for home use but also for export. Many Pennsylvania Germans used the careful farming methods they had learned in Germany. With their large holdings, they needed all the labor they could get. The farm women and girls often toiled in the fields as well as doing their usual work. The farms also used indentured servants, women as well as men. The leading export crop in Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina was tobacco. Its cultivation quickly wore out the soil, and many growers acquired larger plantations in order to gain reserve supplies of fresh land. The labor was simple and repetitive, the kind that slave gangs could easily be forced to do. In South Carolina and Georgia, it was profitable to use slaves. Part of the year they waded in flooded fields along the river bottoms to cultivate rice. In other seasons they tended indigo plants and helped make blue indigo dye. On farms and plantations everywhere there was a good deal of manufacturing. Families made their own yam, cloth, clothes, shoes, candles, and soap, as weil as bread, butter, cheese, and other foodstuffs. Some farmers operated sawmills, and many fished. Lumbering, fishing, fur trading, iron making, and shipbuilding developed into large and specialized industries, especially in the middle colonies and New England. These industries often employed many workers. In the cities, such skilled craftsmen as cobblers, carpenters, candlemakers, weavers, tailors, wheelwrights, tinsmiths, and black- few spent much time in school. Some boys were apprenticed to master craftsmen and in this way learned skilled trades. It was most important to be able to do the farm work well, and this was usually learned at a parent's side, not in a classroom. The children might chum butter, pound grain, hoe the garden, feed the poultry, and carry water or lunches to the field workers. At harvest time, like everyone else, they helped gather the crops. Among the slaves, the greatest social distinctions were based on jobs or skin color. The greatest prestige on large plantations was to be a house servant. Some supervised the work of other slaves, and many slaves were craftsmen. Light-skinned slaves were often given special treatment. They were more likely to be sent to school or to be trained as house servants than darker slaves. Most slave men worked in the fields. Slave women worked in the fields most of the time and also did the housework and home manufactures. They were encouraged to produce slave children, and some were used as wet nurses. Since slaves were regarded as property, they had no legal rights. They could not legally marry, and slave families were often broken up by the sale of family members. Because slaves could not move upward in society, many chose to move "outward" by escaping, joining Indian tribes, or plotting rebellions. Religion The religions were brought from Europe, but they formed a new pattern in North America. In each European nation there was a state church, usually Catholic or Protestant, and the people were required to follow its practices and contribute to its support, whether they agreed with it or not. In the colonies, by contrast, there were a number of religious groups, none of them completely dominant over the others. True, the Church of England was the established church in several colonies, and the people had to pay taxes to support it. In fact, however, the Church of England kept its privileged position only in Virginia, Maryland, and parts of a few other colonies. Even in those places other denominations eventually were allowed to worship as they pleased. The Puritan, or Congregational, church had been established in Massachusetts, Connecticut, and New Hampshire. In the early years, other religious groups were not allowed to set up churches of their own. By the end of the colonial period, however, this policy had been changed. To visitors from Europe, the number of religious groups in the colonies seemed unbelievable. Actually, this variety was not surprising, given the number of nationalities found in the colonies. Many of the religious groups got their start with members of state churches from the old country. The Anglicans, Congregationalists, Quakers, and Baptists represented the variety of belief among English Protestants. The Presbyterians were often from Scotland, the Lutherans and Mo- ravians from Germany or the Scandinavian countries, and the Dutch Reformed from the Netherlands. The great majority of the people were Protestants, but there were some Catholics and Jews. Most of the Catholics were English, Irish, or German. Many of them settled in Maryland, which was founded by a Catholic proprietor, Lord Baltimore, to provide a haven for Catholics. The first Jews in the colonies had come from Spain and the Netherlands by way of Brazil. Most of them settled in New Amsterdam (later New York) and Rhode Island, where the laws allowed them a certain measure of freedom to practice their beliefs. By 1720, the majority of the Jews were from Germany. Many of the Protestants were Calvinists. beyond tl]e Souttjefh cFrontier' Rivalries among the Spanish, French, and British shaped the early history of the areas south and west of the thirteen British colonies. The Spanish claimed the territory that is now Florida but were unable to maintain colonies against raids by the English. They set up small towns and forts on the east coast and limited their colonizing efforts to converting the Indians. But British settlers in South Carolina and Georgia continually raided Florida towns for slaves and harassed the Spanish settlers. Finally, in 1762, the British captured Havana in Cuba and traded it to Spain for Florida. The British were more successful in Florida than the Spanish had been. Wealthy investors lured settlers with attractive offers. For example, Or. Andrew Turnbull persuaded 1,500 persons to leave Italy, Greece, and Minorca and set up a colony at New Smyrna. As roads were built, the east coast became prosperous. During the development of Florida and the British colonies, France controlled most of what is now Louisiana. By 1699 the French had set up the colony of Biloxi. Louis XIV was more interested in the possibility of gold and silver in the region than he was in colonization, No treasure was found, however. To rid itself of the burden of maintaining settlements in Louisiana, the French government gave trading rights to Antoine Crozat, a rich merchant. Unsuccessful, in 1717 he gave his rights to the Company of the West. This company advertised the Louisiana wilderness as a paradise and lured thousands of Europeans. Although New Orleans began to grow rapidly, the rest of Louisiana did not. Income from trade was so small that the French government had to support the colony. After defeat in the French and Indian War. Louis XV of France gave New Orleans and all of Louisiana west of the Mississippi to Carlos III of Spam. Louis gave the French settlements east of the river, except New Orleans, to Britain. This gift did not please the French colonists in Louisiana. In 1766, a mob of settlers took over New Orleans, expelled the Spanish governor, and prevented his return for ten months. Ttiis view ot a prosperous colony m Biloxi was used to promote immigration to the settlements. The population grew rapidly in the years before the 1790 census. It is estimated that the British colonies gained 1 million people between 1760 and 1775, primarily because of a high birth rate and the influx of immigrants. The colonists were encouraged to marry and lo marry early. Since considerable labor was needed to make a farm productive, a big family was considered a necessity. Families of ten or twelve children were common, and those of twenty or twenty-five were not unusual. The country had a high death rate among infants and young children, however. Even in well- settled areas, as many as one-third of the children died before the age of five. Life was hard for adults as well as for children. Many marriages ended early with the death of one partner. Second marriages were often entered into shortly after the funeral, for marriage was in many ways an economic necessity, Third and fourth marriages were not uncommon. During the Revolutionary War, population growth slowed This was partly due to fatalities of war (approximately 100.000). the departure of many Loyalists, and a lower birth rate. Some of these losses were offset by continued immigration and by British and German troops who decided to stay after the war. As peace was restored, the population began to grow rapidly again. Most Americans favored unlimited immigration, and political leaders encouraged it. Also, the slave trade increased. By 1790. the United States was still a nation with a young population. For example, the median age of white males was 16. At the time of the first census in 1790, western New York and Pennsylvania were considered the most promising areas in which to settle. Both had fertile, reasonably priced land to offer, and both were less crowded than many of the New England and southern states. A large number of Americans were moving west in 1790. By that year, the non-Indian population of the territory of Tennessee, for example, had grown to approximately 70.000. and English 48.7%, African 20% Scotch-lrlsh 7.8% German 7.0% Scotch 6.6% Dutch 2.7% Other Religious denominations shown in areas where they wore strongest: A Anglican (Episcopal) B Baptist C Congregational D Dutch Reformed F French Huguenot G German Reformed J Jewish L Lutheran M Methodist P Presbyterian Q Quaker R Roman Catholic merce, also helped prepare the way for the economic growth of the nation. Harsher Controls on Blacks During the Era of Good Feelings, many slaves and free blacks started to face greater obstacles because of their race. As white planters became more dependent on maintaining the institution of slavery, they tightened the slave codes, which regulated the behavior of slaves. In some quarters, slavery was praised as a "positive good," where once it had been viewed as a necessary evil. There were occasioned rumors that slaves were planning to revolt, and these, too, helped bring harsher controls. The most notable plot of the 1820's was that planned by Denmark Vesey, a free black in Charleston. After his plans for a massive insurrection were revealed by a slave, he and thirty-five other blacks were tried and hanged. The plot led to laws isolating slaves from free blacks. Though the slave codes were limited to the South, blacks in the North did not fare much better. Their rights were often disregarded. Like free southern blacks, they lived with the fear that they might be kidnaped and sold into slavery. Attempts to improve their lot sometimes met with violence. When Napoleon sold Louisiana to the United States, the boundaries were not defined. The purchase treaty merely said that France was transferring the territory with the same boundaries it had had. But what were they? It was commonly supposed that Louisiana consisted of all the land between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains and from the Gulf of Mexico to Canada, a British possession. President Jefferson argued that the purchase also included the part of West Florida between the Mississippi and Perdido The woodcut at right was part of a handbill titled "Dreadful Riot on Negro Hill." The verse on the handbill was a fictitious account of a Boston riot in the late 1820's. Blacks and immigrants were often the victims of riots in the 1830 s. Little was done to protect victims or to prosecute rioters. In 1810 and again during the War of 1812, people from the United States seized parts of West Florida, and the federal government extended its jurisdiction to include them. Spain, however, continued to claim all of West as welt as East Florida. In addition, it disputed the southwestern boundary of the Louisiana Purchase. Invasion of the Floridas The American desire for the remainder of Florida had been one of the causes of the War of 1812. This territory was important because of the richness of the land and because of its location. Whoever controlled Florida could interfere with trade on the Mississippi and other rivers flowing into the Gulf of Mexico. The territory was important for still other reasons. Runaway black slaves frequently headed south to Spanish Florida and freedom. Indian raiding parties from Florida often attacked American settlements to the north. In 1818, Andrew Jackson and a small army pursued a band of Seminole Indians into Florida. He did not stop until he had seized the fort of St. Marks, the town of Pensacola, and every other important Spanish post except St. Augustine. He captured two British traders, tried them on charges of supplying and inciting the Seminoles, and had them put to death. He later said he was sorry he did not also hang the Spanish governor of the territory. Already famous as the "hero of New Orle- ans," Jackson was hailed by many Americans. Most of President Monroe's cabinet advisers felt, however, that Jackson had especially in New England, abandoned their farms. Whole towns were practically deserted and the buildings left to fall in ruins. In the Northeast as a whole, however, most farmers stayed put and took advantage of their nearness to the growing cities. They concentrated on producing items that could not easily be shipped in from a distance—milk, butter, cheese, potatoes, apples and other fruits, and hay. The Northwest The settlers who had started pushing into the Northwest in the 1820's were joined by many others in the 1830's. Most were still small farmers, buying their lands from the government or from land speculators. A number of cities were developing, especially on the rivers and lakes. Cincinnati, on the Ohio, was the largest city, with a population of 40,000. St. Louis, on the Mississippi, was the second largest, with 10,000. Chicago had only a few hundred people in the 1830's but was growing fast. The cities were centers for the storage, shipment, and processing of farm and forest products. The leading industries were lumbering, woodworking, flour milling, meat packing, whiskey distilling, and the manufacturing of leather products and fanning equipment. In the 1830's, most of the new settlers went to the northern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois and to Michigan and Wisconsin. Most were New Englanders, New Yorkers, or immigrants who had landed at Boston or New York, The southern parts of Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois had been settled earlier, often by people from Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, and Tennessee. New Approaches to Farming The Northwest, with its huge level fields, was an area of grain crops and cattle farming. Much of the produce was shipped down the Ohio or Mississippi for export. The Great Lakes, tied in with canals, provided another route for exports. New tools continued to have their greatest use in the Northwest. By 1830, iron plows were so much in demand that they were being mass-produced. Soon steel plows became available. They cut the soil cleanly and deeply and were more durable than those made of cast iron. These were especially useful in breaking up the tough prairie sod. Ind"x of Amitrimn Daalgn. Nut tonal Gallery of Arl. Washington DC Needlework arts like applique (above) were popular ways to pass the long winters in Vermont, Cyrus H. McCormick demonstrated his reaper as early as 1831. With the McCormick machine, a crew of six or seven could harvest as much in a day as fifteen persons using the old-fashioned cradle scythe. In years of prosperity many more people went west and many more acres of the public land were sold than in times of depression. During the early 1830's, annual "Whoo ha! Go it boys! We're in a perfect Oregon fever." Some three thousand people made the overland crossing that year. A few were attracted to Oregon by the prospects of the fur trade or by the hope of converting Indians to Christianity. But most were drawn by news of the rich soil of the Willamette Valley, and they went as farmers. Other people were excited by reports of mar. URBAN Many factors contributed to the increase in population between 1790 and 1850 The number of births continued high, and life expectancy increased as medical practices improved Immigrants like those arriving in New York (above lett) swelled the population m the 1830 s and 1840s. The United States was becoming more cosmopolitan as immigration and trade involved all corners of the globe Two Ways of Life 1850-1861 By 1850 the North and the South were two very different sections. Although they were parts of the same nation, they were beginning to seem like two separate countries. The ties that held the sections together were, however, more important at the time than the forces that tended to divide them. Both northerners and southerners were proud of the nation's achievements in industry, commerce, and agriculture. Both northerners and southerners looked to the West as the next great region of the country to be developed. Vet despite these agreements, there was growing hostility between the North and the South. This antagonism was no mere accident. It was "an irrepressible conflict between opposing and enduring forces," as the New York political leader William H. Seward declared in 1858. It arose because the two sections had come to have such different ways of life, such different interests and ideals. Throughout the nineteenth century, the population of Britain and western Europe grew fast, but that of the United States grew even faster. Each new federal census showed the population to be about a third larger. In 1860 there were about eight times as many people in the United States as there had been in 1790. Most of this population growth resulted from the excess of births over deaths. But a considerable portion, especially after 1850, resulted from immigration. Only a few immigrants had arrived during the period from the end of the Revolutionary War (1783) to the end of the War of 1812. After that, the number that came increased slowly and irregularly. Then, in the 1840's, partly because of conditions in Europe, a mass influx began. By 1860, nearly 4 million immigrants were living in the United States. In 1840, the ten largest cities in the nation were in the Northeast and the South but in the next two decades as the Northeast became more industrialized, cities there grew faster than those in the South. The most spectacular population gams were recorded by new cities in the Northwest, including Chicago and St. Louis. Differences in Growth Not all parts of the nation were growing at the same rate. The Northeast gained less than the Northwest (which at this time included Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and Iowa plus the Minnesota Territory). The Northwest gained less than the Far West. For example, the population of California quadrupled, jumping from 100,000 to 400,000 in the 1850's. The South gained even less than the Northeast. The United States was still predominantly, rural. In 1850, Five times as many people were scattered over the countryside as were concentrated in towns and cities. For decades, however, the United States had been becoming more and more urban. The population of the cities was growing much faster than that of the farms. The Northeast continued to be the most highly urbanized area. New York City together with Brooklyn had a population of more than a million by 1860. It continued to gain as the nation's leading port. Some of the cities farther west grew even faster. During the 1850's, St. Louis doubled in population, reaching 161,000, and Chicago tripled, reaching about 110,000. The South had the second busiest port. New Orleans. Yet, on the whole, the South contained fewer cities, towns, .and, villages than the North. It was less densely settled. Tn lttbo, rttF-slave states had an average of about thirteen persons for each square mile; the free states, about twenty. San Francisco, the biggest city in the Far West, was growing phenomenally. By 1860 its population was 56,000, double what it had been in 1848. California, Oregon, and New Mexico were still frontier areas. During the 1850's, some of the people who had come west to search for gold began to abandon the prospector's life. Many settled down to farm or to set up businesses. The Mormons in Deseret (Utah) had by the 1850's established a busy farming and trading community. Much of their prosperity was based on supplying the wagon trains bound for California or Oregon. Growing Diversity Immigrants hoped to make a better living in the United States than they had been able to earn at home. They learned about the United States from accounts, often exaggerated, that shipping companies and land dealers published in order to promote business. They also learned from "America letters" written by friends or relatives already in this country. "Now we get beef and pudding, tea and rum pretty regularly," an English immigrant wrote home; "to us who have been long half-starved in England, it appears like a continual feast." No longer did Europeans cross the ocean as indentured servants, with a master paying the fare. Most could now pay their own way because transatlantic rates had been reduced several times by the shipping companies. Ships usually carried bulky exports, such as lumber, wheat, and cotton, from the United States to Europe and brought back compact imports, such as fine tools and machinery. On the return voyage there was, therefore, empty space. Shippers were glad to fill it with human cargo at almost any price. The largest group of immigrants to come to the United States in the 1840's was Irish. Many people left Ireland because of the terrible famines of 1845 and 1846, when much of the potato crop rotted at harvest time Even after the worst of the famines, people continued to leave Ireland rather than pay the rent increases that landlords continually imposed. Most of the Irish who came to the United States settled in New York City or in other cities in the Northeast. Few went inland to look for farms, since few of them had money enough to buy land or, for that matter, even a railroad ticket. Germans made up the second largest group of foreign-born in the United States. A few former leaders of the German revolutionary movement of 1848 were in this group. Most of the Germans who came to the United States were peasants or farmers, though not so desperately poor as the Irish. Many brought money enough to buy farms, German immigrants brougtfl many of their national customs and celebrations to America The parade forming in Weaver- ville, California (left) is a celebration of May Day Music was an important part of these festivals. German people preserved their culture in other ways as well They set up churches in new areas of settlement. German language newspapers were numerous Pj 1850. Some attempts were made to set up German schools, but most people took advantage of public education German clubs and associations provided aid to immigrants. They also gave new settlers e way to participate in familiar social activities. and while some chose to remain in eastern cities, others spread out to become a very large element of the population not only in New York and Pennsylvania but also in Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, and Missouri. Other groups came to the United States in considerable numbers, too, especially the English, French, Swedes, and Norwegians. The Scandinavians in particular often settled on farms in the Midwest. Few of the immigrants settled in the South. Most of them arrived at northern ports, especially New York, and remained there. Some immigrants landed at southern ports, especially New Orleans, but did not wish to remain in the South. Most of them disliked slavery on principle or wished to avoid the competition offered by slave labor. They went up the Mississippi River to look for homes in the Northwest or the Far West. As a result, the white population in the South remained fairly homogeneous while that in the North became more and more diversified. Opposition to Immigrants Many native Americans were alarmed by the influx of immigrants. Some of them believed that the newcomers threatened American society with an increase in poverty and crime. Others were alarmed because some immigrants were given fake citizenship papers soon after they landed and were led to the polls to vote for crooked politicians. And some Americans were afraid that they would lose their jobs to immigrants who were willing to accept lower pay. "Our public improvements, railroads, and canals are thronged with foreigners," a newspaper writer complained. "They fill our large cities, reduce the wages of labor, and increase the hardships of the old settler." Most of the immigrants were Catholics (about half of the Germans and nearly all of the Irish). The prejudice against immigrants was greatly intensified because the nation was predominantly Protestant. Many anti- Catholic writers insisted that the immigrants were pawns in a gigantic plot to put the pope Northern and Central Europe Eastern and Southern Europe H Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia, Belgium, Russia and Baltic States, Romania. Netherlands, France, Switzerland, Bulgaria, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Germany, Poland, Austria-Hungary Spain, Portugal If ! In this 1856 cartoon, a wagon full ot boisterous Know-Nothings rushes wildly down a Baltimore street As part of their campaign to elect a Know- Nothing mayor, they have armed themselves to prevent the Irish and the Germans, particularly Catholics, from coming to the polls in control of the United States. They were being deliberately sent to this country, it was said, to prepare the way by extending the influence of the Roman Catholic Church through their votes. Strict laws were demanded by many of the native Americans to discourage immigration and to limit the political activity of the for- eign-born. One of the proposed laws would have stopped the immigration of Catholics. Another would have required aliens to reside in the United States for twenty-one years before they could be naturalized. Still another would have barred all the foreign-born from public office, even after they had become citizens. None of these restrictive laws was passed. In 1850, a number of antiforeign groups combined to form a national secret society, the Order of the Star-spangled Banner. In 1854, they converted this into a political organization and named it the Native American party. Outsiders usually called it the Know-Nothing party because the members were instructed to say "I know nothing" whenever they were asked about the party's secrets. Some southerners supported the Know- Nothing movement even though there were few immigrants in the South. They wished to limit immigration because they could see that it was doing little for their section while it was contributing a great deal to the economic and political strength of the North. The Know-Nothings never had the support of a majority of the American people. A number of native citizens spoke out in defense of the immigrants. One said: Laboring like slaves for us, they have built our cities and railroads; piercing the western wilds, they have caused them to blossom into gardens; taking part in our commerce and manufactures, they have helped to carry the triumphs of our arts to the remotest corners of the globe. Another insisted that the "real American" was the person who gave both "mind and heart to the grand constituent ideas of the Republic," no matter where he or she had come from. Before 1850, there had been not one North but two—the Northeast and the Northwest. The_Northwest had many economic ties with seven employees could produce five tons a day. Another took brass wire and formed it into pins so fast that a single factory had a daily output of 300,000. Samuel Colt improved upon the principles of mass production and eventually made his gun factory in Hartford, Connecticut, the largest in the world. An American of the 1850's boasted that the United States offered the best and cheapest farm implements, the best carpenters' tools, the best locks, fire-engines, nails, screws, and axes; the best firearms, the cheapest docks, the fastest steamers and sailing vessels, the cheapest railroads, the lightest wagons, and many of the most useful laborsaving devices in every department of industry. Until 1857, both the North and the South were unusually prosperous. Vast quantities of gold, coming from the mines of California, were being turned into coins. The abundance of money encouraged people to spend freely, thus stimulating business. The construction of railroads created thousands of new jobs. War in Europe (the Crimean War, 1854-1856) caused an abnormally large demand for the output of American farms, plantations, and factories. Ocean shipping as well as agriculture and industry thrived. The boom suddenly ended with the Panic of 1857, which marked the beginning of the third great depression of the nineteenth century. The North, with far more industry than the South, was hit much harder by the depression. As a result, the economic progress of the North was temporarily slowed. The Rich and the Poor To an English visitor in the North, it seemed as if almost everyone was engaged in a scramble for wealth. Many people met with some degree of success. The great majority of northerners lived and worked on family- owned farms. Some became well-to-do, not so much by selling crops as by selling land Skilled craftsmen like this northern wheelwright often worked fourteen-hour days and earned a bare living wage Gradually, fewer people were attracted lo c'at apprenticeships, as factory-made goods began to replace Individually made goods that had risen in value. But the wealthiest people got their money from commerce and manufacturers. Most of them lived in the cities and industrial towns, where the poorest people lived, too. Most wage earners labored long hours— eleven or more for most of them. New England mill hands worked as many as fifteen hours a day. Unskilled workers received about a dollar a day, and skilled workers were seldom paid more than two dollars. Few laborers could earn more than $300 to $600 a year, even if lucky enough to have steady jobs. At any time, jobs were liable to disappear, temporarily or permanently. Slack business in particular industries, general depressions, or the introduction of labor-saving machinery ended many jobs. Poverty caused by industrialization became a special problem in manufacturing towns and cities. Life was especially difficult for Irish immigrants and for blacks. The Irish lived in dark and dirty tenements and accepted whatever work they could get, usually the hardest and lowest paid. Many Irishmen swung pickaxes in construction gangs that laid railroad tracks and paved city streets. Irishwomen labored long hours as servants, janitors, or machine operators, earning scarcely enough to stay alive. Discouraging though conditions were, the newcomers from Ireland thought they could look forward to a better life for their children. Some of the children went to school, but most, like their parents, worked at menial jobs. The blacks in northern towns and cities had even less to look forward to than the Irish. A very few black men became merchants, bankers, lawyers, and the like. l$e tfnow^lNgtljings Between 1830 and 1860, more than 4 million immigrants entered the United States. Most came from Ireland and Germany, large numbers of them were Catholics, and many were poor. in 1835. about half of those in poorhouses in New York, Boston, and New Orleans were immigrants. Growing numbers of native Americans believed that foreign paupers should be denied entry to the United States. Many people in the United States also feared that the American system was endangered by the growing political power of the immigrants. Some German immigrants who had engaged in a revolt in their homeland were labeled as radicals and anarchists. The Irish were considered dangerous because their concentration in certain large cities made it possible for them to outnumber non-Irish voters on election day. The mushrooming growth of the Catholic Church in the United States reinforced a longstanding distrust of Catholics on the part of Protestants. When Catholic immigrants began to run for office, many non-Catholics said that the church was trying to gain control of the American political process. In the 1840's, anti- Catholic riots erupted in many cities. A number of antiforeign groups sprang up. The most notable was the American, or ''Know-Nothing," party. Many voters were drawn to the party's "America for Americans" slogan and to its proposals to limit immigration. Although the Know-Nothing party tried to promote national unity, it could not overcome sectional differences. The Know-Nothings of the South wanted to limit immigration in order to limit the growth and the votes of the North. They feared the antislavery sentiments of some immigrant groups. But many northern Know- Nothings were abolitionists. Their anti-immi- grant feelings were often aimed at the Irish, who were usually antiabolitionist as well as Catholic. The Irish competed with blacks for jobs, and many favored slavery. The slavery issue ultimately divided the Know-Nothings. It became the dominant political issue, and the Know-Nothing party faded Pat and Fritz, symbols of the Irish and the Germans, walk off with a ballot box. reaching consequences. These consequences varied in detail from country to country, but all were felt in some way in the countries undergoing technological change. The most obvious and most direct result was a tremendous increase in the production of material goods. By 1400, for example, the textile machines of Britain were turning out billions of yards of cotton cloth a year. They produced many times as much as the people of that country could have made if all of them—men, women, and children—had been set to work with old-fashioned spinning wheels and hand looms. The technological advances made possible great population growth. Britain, for example, had about three times as many people in 1900 as in 1815. The main reason for the increase was not that families had more children but that more babies survived and people in general lived longer. The death rate declined both because more food became available and because progress was made in the prevention and cure of disease. Medical science made its greatest single advance when, near the middle of the nineteenth century, a French professor of chemistry, Louis Pasteur, proved that many diseases were caused by bacteria. At the same time, more and more people were crowding together in cities. That is to say, there was a great increase in urbanization. The new technology made large cities necessary, and it also made them possible. Large masses of labor were needed to operate the machines. The machines and hence the workers, together with shopkeepers to serve them, were concentrated in places where power and raw materials were readily available. Another characteristic of the Industrial Revolution was the improvement of many different kinds of transportation. Steam locomotives and steamships could bring food from a distance to feed the people of the cities. Improved transportation also increased the mobility of large segments erf the world's population, and emigration to other countries became common. Immigration ;e the United States from Europe and Asia increased greatly after the Civil War. A great deal of it was permanent, but some of it was seasonal. The speed of the transatlantic voyage, for instance, made it possible for some Europeans to come to the United States in the spring to work on farms and to return to their homes in Europe after the harvest was completed. The technological and economic changes gave rise to a new kind of industrial conflict, that between corporations and unions. The owners of the industries came to consist largely of corporations. To offset the power of such companies, the employees formed unions. They resorted to strikes and boycotts and demanded that the companies improve working conditions, that the unions be recognized as bargaining agents, and that laws be passed to regulate industry. The employers acquired social philosophies that opposed the union position. Many capitalists contended that government should not interfere with business. This idea, known as laissez-faire, had its origins in the writings of Adam Smith, an Englishman. He wrote in the late eighteenth century, when the Industrial Revolution was just starting to be felt in Britain. He demanded a free and open market, unregulated by government. In such a market, the price of everything wa supposedly be determined by supply and demand. The workers acquired two social philosophies that encouraged and justified them in their struggle against the employers. Oneof these philosophies was "scientific socialism," or communism. Its chief founder was Kail Marx, a German who came from a well-to-do family and received a good university education. According to Marx's economic theory Union Pacific, laid tracks westward from Omaha while another, the Central Pacific, built eastward from Sacramento. Immigrants were hired to do most of the heavy labor. Japanese, Chinese, and Mexican workers predominated in the building of the Central Pacific, and German, Irish, and Mexican laborers in the constructing of the Union Pacific. Both lines also employed a number of former slaves. The work was difficult because of the tremendous distances and the deserts and mountains to be crossed. Workers with picks and shovels and horse-drawn scrapers prepared the roadbed. Other crews laid the rails by hand. Since the railroad lines brought settlers who did not always stay within the areas described in Indian treaties, Indians often fought the advance of the railroads. Armed guards were hired to fight off such attacks. later other rail lines were extended to the West Coast—the Southern Pacific; the Northern Pacific; the Great Northern; and the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe. All except the Great Northern were built with government aid. The federal government followed a generous policy toward these and other railroads. It provided millions of dollars in loans and millions of acres in land grants. The grants consisted of alternate one-mile-square sections on both sides of the right-of-way. The government retained every other section, and thus the granted and ungranted lands formed a checkerboard pattern. The government benefited from its policy because the value of the land it kept was increased by the construction of the railroads. Also, the railroads receiving the grants were required to carry mail, troops, and military supplies at less than the regular rates. State governments encouraged railroad construction by buying railroad stocks and bonds and by giving additional grants of land. Without this generous public help, most of the railroads in thinly settled areas would not have been built until much later, if at all. The Great Northern, connecting Lake Superior with Puget Sound, was built by James J. Hill. Hill aimed to promote trade with East Asia and settlement on the Great Plains as well as to make money for himself. With no federal loans or lands, he paid for construction as he went along. As each stretch of track was completed, he gave free transportation to people taking up farms along the route. Then he sold them tools and machinery on easy credit. As farms developed, he made enough from the shipment of crops to pay for building his railroad farther west. In the East the most important railroads were the New York Central, the Pennsylvania, the Erie, and the Baltimore & Ohio. By 1874, each of these had incorporated a number of relatively short lines to make a large system reaching from New York City, or its vicinity, to Chicago. The New York Central was developed by Cornelius Vanderbilt, who had made a fortune from the shipping business and from the stock market. He projected and carried out his great plan for connecting New York and Chicago by a "water-level route" along the Hudson and Mohawk rivers and the shore of Lake Erie. In the South the first task of the railroads after the Civil War was to repair the war damage. Then new lines were constructed. By 1890, the South had six times as much trackage as in 1865. Finally, through consolidations, large systems were created—the Southern Railway, the Atlantic Coast Line, and the Illinois Central. Most of these railroads were financed by private investors, many of whom were British. Improved Service So many railroads were built that, especially in times of depression, there was not enough freight and passenger traffic to go previous decade. While immigration was increasing as never before, its origin was changing. Before the 1880's, most immigrants had come from the British Isles or other parts of northwestern Europe. Then more and more began to come from eastern and southern Europe and from Asia. By the late 1890's, three of every five immigrants were coming from these areas. The new immigrants—mainly Italians, Czechs, Slavs, Hungarians, Poles, and Russians in the East and Midwest, and Chinese and Japanese on the West Coast—were essentially like the earlier ones. They had left their homes, friends, and familiar ways of life because they had heard that America was a land of opportunity. Those who arrived in New York harbor were greeted by the Statue of Liberty, a gift from the people of France. Once they had landed, however, the newcomers generally got an indifferent or hostile reception from native Americans. This was due in part to nativism, the feeling on the part of people born in the United States that they were somehow superior to the foreign- born. Hostility toward immigrants also arose from competition for jobs. Peasants from eastern and southern Europe often were willing to accept pay that seemed good to them but that was unacceptable to native Amen- cans, who were used to being paid more for their labor. Working people generally supported demands that the federal government act tocst down immigration. Companies employing large numbers of workers opposed such demands. Although the government imposedi few restrictions, it did little to halt immigration to the United States. The Chinese Exclusion Act (1882) stopped any more Chinese from coming to the United States. Another act of Congress (1885) prohibited employers from bringing in immigrants and holding them to labor contracts made before the immigrants arrived. Still other laws forbade the Id many immigrants, the garment industry uttered some hope of future independence from factory work. Some did piecework in then homes (left), often after a day's work in asmail. crowded factory As more and more immigrants arrived, angry opposition to unlimited immigration grew. Hate-filled carbons (right) and editorials began to appear regularly Part of this opposition was based on the belief that native Americans were losing jobs to Immigrants, In many cases, however. the influx of cheap immigrant labor enabled native Americans to move up more rapidly in expanding industries. entry of paupers, lunatics, convicts, and peo- | pie with certain kinds of diseases, I Forming Unions j Up until the Civil War, labor unions, when I they existed at all, were usually local or- lawizations. A few national unions were I formed, but they were the exceptions, lm- I mediately after the war, a number of national I anions pledged their support for the National I Labor Union, founded in 1866. It was never I very strong nor was it truly "national." After the death of its leader, it collapsed. In the 1870's, two other organizations tried 1 to bring workers together on a large scale. I One of these, the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor, reached its peak of I strength and membership in 1886, then I began to decline and finally disappeared. The lether, the American Federation of Labor, reorganized that same year and grew steadily om then on. The two were quite Afferent. The Knights hoped to create one big union that would include practically all kinds of workers, skilled and unskilled, male and female, white and black, native and foreign- born. The order aimed to improve not only the economic condition but also the social standing of its members. It wished to give them a sense of the "nobility" of labor. It encouraged worker education, started cooperative factories and stores, and supported the arbitration of disputes between employers and employees. At first it was secret, because many employers automatically fired union members. The Knights' greatest leader was Terence V. Powderly, a Pennsylvania machinist. He had lost his job and had been blacklisted— barred from future employment in indus- try—because of union activities. As "Grand Master Workman" of the Knights, however, Powderly ended the rule of secrecy and saw the organization grow to 700,000 members. Although he disliked strikes and violence, he could not keep members from participating in them, and indeed the order grew largely because local leaders sponsored a series of successful railroad strikes. Then came the Haymarket Riot. On May Day, 1886, workers throughout the country had gone on strike to dramatize their demand for an eight-hour day. On May 3, Chicago police killed several strikers near the McCormick Harvester Works. That evening a crowd met in Chicago's Haymarket Square to protest the brutality of the police. When mounted policemen tried to break up the meeting, someone threw a bornb. Seven policemen and four participants were killed and more than a hundred other persons were wounded. Afterwards eight German immigrants were tried and convicted for their part in the riot. Four were hanged and one committed suicide. (Governor John P. Altgeld pardoned the other three in June 1893.) No evidence had been brought forth to connect any of the eight with the making or throwing of the bornb. All of them, however, were anarchists who had opposed all government. Certainly the Knights of Labor had had nothing to do with the bornbing. Yet, because they had taken a leading part in the May Day strikes, the Knights came to be viewed as dangerous radicals. This was one reason for the decline of the organization. A more important reason, however, was the Knights' continuing failure to attract many skilled workers. The American Federation of Labor, on the other hand, was interested only in skilled craftsmen, such as carpenters, plumbers, and bricklayers. The AFL did not try to organize miners, steelworkers, or other unskilled laborers. It was not one big union but rather a federation of separate craft unions. For nearly forty years the president of the AFL was Samuel Gompers, a cigar-maker. Under his shrewd leadership, the AFL con- Eugene Debs delivers one of his many freightyart speeches to a crowd of workers He wanted to organize a strong, all-inclusive rail union. centrated on what he called "pure and simple" unionism, that is, the winning of higher wages bit by bit through direct bargaining with employers. Gompers favored strikes and boycotts to back up the workers' demands, but he managed to keep the AFL from taking part in any serious acts of violence. By 1900, about half a million men and a few thousand women belonged to the member unions. Losing Battles On several occasions industrial workers took part in strikes that became bloody when the employers used force against the strikers Two of the worst cases were the Homestead strike of 1892 and the Pullman strike of 1894. At the Homestead plant of the Carnegie Steel Company, the manager Henry Gay Frick decided to cut pay rates. The union, i branch of the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers, refused to accept the wage cut. Frick closed the plant and hired 300 Pinkerton detectives to guard it. The strikers attacked the "Pinkertons," captured and disarmed them, and drove them out of town. Then Frick called upon the Pennsylvania governor for troops, and for five months the state militia guarded the plant Public opinion supported the strikers until i young anarchist shot and wounded Frick. Finally, the workers had no choice but to accept the pay cut and go back to their jobs. George M. Pullman, developer of the sleeping car, had set up the "model town" of Pullman, near Chicago, for his employees During the Panic of 1893, the Pullman Company laid off a third of the workers and reduced the wages of the rest. But it did not lower the rent on company-owned houses nor lower the prices at the company-owned This confusion of authority made possible, and perhaps made necessary, the rise of the political "boss" and "machine." The boss was the real ruler of the city, though he did not necessarily hold any official position. The machine was the party organization through which he controlled a majority of those who were in office. As a kind of "in- visible government," he and his organization provided the centralized power that was lacking in the regular government. The boss made money for himself and financed his machine through corruption. He often awarded contracts for the construction of streets, sewers, public buildings, and other projects at prices far above the real cost. He divided the surplus between himself and his friends. He also sold franchises for the operation of railways, waterworks, electric-power systems, and other utilities. He had the support of wealthy and important citizens who profited from their deals with him. The boss also got the votes of the needy, many of whom were immigrants. They looked to him for help, and he furnished informal relief, such as coal for their stoves, a turkey at Thanksgiving, or a gift package at Christmas. He often stepped in to save them from punishment for petty crimes. Most important, he rewarded them with political jobs, with opportunities to rise in the party organization. In most cases the boss himself was of immigrant stock and had come up from poverty. Thus "boss rule" had its democratic aspects. It flourished because it took care of needs that no other institution of the time adequately met. A Look at Specifics 1. In what ways did the policies of the federal government aid industrial development between 1865 and 1900? 2. What methods did the Standard Oil Company use to reduce the number of its competitors? 3. How did the typical form of business organization change after the Civil War? 4. Explain the following forms of business consolidation: mergers, pools, trusts, holding companies, interlocking directorates. 5. Why were bankers on the board of directors of many corporations? 6. Why did industrial workers of the late nineteenth century feel it was necessary to bargain collectively with their employers? 7. Why did many immigrants support political bosses? A Review of Major Ideas 1. What factors accounted for the rapid industrial development in the United States after the Civil War? 2. In what ways did improved transportation and communication make possible the rise of large-scale industries? 3. How did industrial workers attempt to improve their lot? What successes did they achieve? 4. What problems arose as cities became larger? In the late nineteenth century, what attempts were made to solve the problems of the cities? For Independent Study 1. Henry George's single tax theory was based on his observation that land values increased because of social accident. For example, an acre of land in the city was more valuable than one in rural areas only because of the concentration of people living in the city, not necessarily because the owner of city real estate had done any work to make the land more valuable. Thus George argued that rent on land ought to be paid to the state as a tax. Do you believe his ideas were valid? Explain your answer. 2. Some Americans think that today's big unions are as harmful as big businesses were considered in the nineteenth century. Do you agree? Why? as well as Mexicans and other foreign-born workers. On their cow ponies (mostly mustangs, wild horses descended from stock developed by the Spaniards), these cowhands performed the chores of the roundup and the long drive. The cowhands' work was tedious, sometimes dangerous, and generally low-paid. In the saloons and gambling houses of the cow town at the end of the trail, they often spent their meager earnings in one wild, drunken spree. The open range lasted about twenty years, from the 1860's to the 1880's. During this time, the cattle owners and cowboys had to deal with various enemies. Rustlers made off with many cattle, altered the brands, and sold them. Farmers, or "nesters," settled on much of the land and fenced in their farms, thus blocking the trails and the access to water. Sheepherders brought in large flocks of sheep that cropped the grass so short it died. At times (but not so often as depicted in movies), cattle owners and cowboys engaged in gunfights, not only with rustlers, but also with nesters and sheepherders. The range-cattle industry began to disappear because, with increasing settlement, the open range itself was disappearing. Meanwhile, the range was being more and more heavily stocked with cattle. The range could support them only so long as the weather was favorable. The winter of 1885/86 was unusually cold on the plains. It was followed by a hot, dry summer, and then another bad winter, with terrible blizzards. Thousands and thousands of cattle starved or froze to death, and many cattle owners saw their businesses ruined. After that, the range-cattle industry was abandoned in favor of the ranch-cattle industry. Some cattle continued to be raised on the open plains, but most were raised on ranches. Grazing lands were fenced, and shelter and supplementary feed were available in the winter. New Farms While some people were raising cattle on the plains, many more were moving in to take up family-size farms. These settlers included many Union Army veterans and many newly arrived immigrants, especially from the Scandinavian countries. Land seekers, rather than gold hunters or cattle raisers, accounted for most of the remarkable population growth of the plains area. The population of the best farming portion—Kansas, Nebraska, and the Dakota Territory- increased from about half a million in 1870 to 1.5 million in 1880 and 3 million in 1890. Some of the newcomers got land directly from the federal government. Under the Preemption Act of 1841 (in effect until 1891), a settler could buy 160 acres of government land for as little as $1.25 an acre. Under the Homestead Act of 1862, a citizen of the United States or an alien who was over 21 and who had declared the intention of becoming a citizen could acquire 160 acres by paying a few dollars in fees and living on and improving the land for five years. Under a law of 1870, a Union veteran or his widow could count his years of army service; thus, if he had served four years, he or his widow could get a homestead by occupying it for only a year. Under the Timber Culture Act of 1873, a person could secure an additional 160 acres by agreeing to plant trees on part of that land. Three million acres in Indian Territory (present-day Oklahoma), which had been set aside for Indians, were opened to homesteaders in 1889. On opening day, 50,000 people, who had been waiting on the border, raced into the territory on foot or horseback, on bicycles, in wagons or trains to stakeout their claims. The sooner a person arrived, the better the chances of getting good land Within a few hours, all the available land was taken up. Throughout the West as a whole, how- of new-found scientific knowledge and the problems created by an industrial society. An important development in the Protestant churches was the social gospel movement. It taught that the saving of society was necessary to the saving of souls. The poverty in the cities, the loss of church membership among the working people, and the wide acceptance of science caused religious leaders to rethink some of the concerns of their churches. Leaders of the social gospel movement said that much of the poverty in the industrial cities arose from conditions for which the individual could not be blamed. The Catholic Church, too, felt the challenges of science and the industrial society. Its leaders took a conservative stand on the new scientific trends. In the United States some Catholic leaders opposed the social agitation of the 1880's and 1890's. But others believed that the workers and the poor— many of them Catholic immigrants—suffered from injustices caused by society and needed help from the church. In 1891, in a public letter called Rerum Novarum, Pope Leo XIIT supported this view. He condemned the evils of the industrial system as "laying upon the shoulders of the working classes a yoke little better than slavery itself." The Protestant and Jewish faiths were based primarily on biblical interpretation, while Catholicism concentrated on the sacraments. In the light of new knowledge, many Protestants and Jews applied scientific principles to biblical interpretation. The result was drastic change. Within the Protestant sector, a number of heresy trials were held. One of two basic ({uestions was usually at stake: Was the Bible lobe interpreted literally or figuratively? Was Charles Darwin's theory of evolution correct? The resulting split between those who believed in a literal interpretation of the Bible and those who believed otherwise has not yet been resolved. The application of scientific principles to religious beliefs took place at much the same time that a great number of Jews left Europe for America. Along with criticism of Talmudic writings came a concern for practical problems faced by American Jews. In the 1880's, Conservative Judaism was developed in the United States. Conservative Jews refused to go along with some of the changes promoted by Reform Jews but at the same time rejected some of the traditional practices of Orthodox Judaism. The Catholic Church faced practical problems of nationality. By the 1880's the leaders of the church were mostly Americans of Irish descent. But the Catholic immigrants who streamed into the eastern ports were mostly Italian, Polish, or Slavic. They demanded, and eventually got, a few priests and nuns who spoke the same language. But several national churches splintered off from the Roman church. Universities A key date in the shift to a practical and scientific emphasis in universities was 1869. In that year a scientist became president of Harvard University, the nation's oldest institution of higher learning. He raised entrance requirements, enlarged the faculty, and introduced new courses. He also put the elective system into practice. Under this system, students were given wider freedom in choosing subjects. Harvard's changes had a great influence on other colleges. The Johns Hopkins University, founded in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1876, set the pattern for advanced study in the United States. Unlike other universities, Johns Hopkins primarily offered graduate work. It stressed training in research through the use of laboratories and small seminars. Scientific and practical trends made most rapid headway in several new private universities. Two of the most notable were 5tan- The Changing Society An unplanned playground—the fire escape. All countries, all peoples, are constantly changing. But many people are uncomfortable with change and try to resist it ot slow it down. Americans, it has been said, are unique because they commit themselves to change as a normal part of life. Between 1900 and 1920, the nature of the United States changed drastically. A rural nation became urban, the national origins and religions of Americans became more varied. As you read this chapter, ask yourself: Did the people of the United States embrace social change willingly, or did they, like people of other nations, show distrust for what was new and strange? Two forces—immigration and urbaniza- tion—characterized the population changes from 1900 to 1920. About 15 million men, women, and children migrated to the United States in those years. Most of them went to live in cities, in this they were joined by growing numbers of native Americans. Immigration Of the immigrants who came to the United States after 1900, the great majority were from countries in eastern or southern Europe. The usual stepping-off point was New York City, but Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and San Francisco also received many immigrants. Most of the European newcomers took jobs in the sweatshops of the eastern cities and crowded together in squalid tenements. Those who arrived on the West Coast also faced squalor and hard work. In California, j many became farmers. Some immigrants, especially those from northern and western Europe, began farms in the Midwest. A large number of immigrants came from Mexico. Not all were permanent; many were seasonal, migrant workers. Most Mexican immigrants took jobs working on the railroads. Instead of the squalor of the tenement, they faced the squalor of life in a boxcar. The least fortunate lived in tent cities on the edges of cotton fields in California and Texas or of beet fields in Michigan. if the living conditions for immigrants were less than ideal, they were made bearable by the belief that life in the United States held a hope for the future that was not to be found in the old country. In the United States, the newcomers faced many obstacles. The problems were compounded because the immigrants usually settled in cities, often living in ghettos—areas where people of one nationality, race, or religion were concentrated. Earlier immigrants had seemed less noticeable because they had settled throughout the country. The biggest problem was how to make a living in the face of overwhelming competition. In most immigrant families, everyone worked. The families might work both at home and outside the home. Whole families rolled cigars or sewed clothing by hand. Some school-age children might have after- school jobs, but many did not go to school, because their full-time pay was needed to help keep the family alive. The immigrants faced prejudice and discrimination because of their religions and nationalities and because of the bigotry and racism of nativists. Great numbers of the immigrants were Jewish, Catholic, or members of Eastern Orthodox churches. These newcomers, nativists said, were "from beaten races, the worst failures in history" and did not have the pioneer virtues of earlier, northern European immigrants. Nativists said that the new immigrants would be difficult to assimilate, would not be loyal to democracy, and would produce more crime. Like the immigrants who entered the country after the Civil War, those who came after 1900 met the opposition of organized labor. Native American workers and even fairly recent immigrants opposed allowing more people to enter the country. They felt that unlimited immigration pulled down the wages of all workers, for, with a huge supply of workers available, employers were able to get people to work for low wages. Nativists talked about America's "un- guarded gates" that were allowing "un- desirables" into the country. A number of groups started asking Congress to pass laws limiting immigration. On the West Coast, many people opposed the immigration of Chinese or Japanese laborers. This opposition had led to the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882, which stopped immigration from China for twenty years. In 1902, Congress passed a new law that excluded Chinese immigration for an indefinite period. The opposition to Japanese immigrants led to the "gentlemen's agreement" with Japan in 1906. In this agreement. President Theodore Roosevelt said that he would get San Franciscans to stop segregating Japanese- American schoolchildren if the Japanese government would limit the further emigration of Japanese laborers. The Chinese Exclusion Act applied to Hawaii and other territories, but the "gen- tlemen's agreement" did not. The Oriental population in Hawaii was growing rapidly. The Chinese had begun coming in large numbers in the 1870's, the Japanese in the 1880's. These immigrants usually went to work on the sugar and pineapple plantations. By 1900, more than 50 percent of the people on the islands were Japanese or Chinese or of such descent. About 1910, Filipinos began entering Hawaii in large numbers. In 1896, 1913, and 1915, Congress passed bills requiring a literacy test for immigrants. In each case, the President then in office vetoed the bill. Finally, in 1917, Congress passed such a law over President Wilson's veto. The law provided that the literacy test could be taken in any language and that the immigrant had to be able to read only a paragraph or two. The test did not apply to those fleeing religious persecution or to illiterate members of the immediate family of an immigrant who had been admitted. Right: Members of an immigrant family make artifica flowers. "Cottage industry" of this sort often involved the whole family. The family usually had to buy Ihe materials from an agent and then hope that the agent would buy back the finished goods. Urbanization In 1800, only about 6 percent of the people in the United States lived in cities. In 1900, about 40 percent of the people lived in cities or towns, and by 1920, over 50 percent. Instead of being farmers or country people, as most of their parents and grandparents had been, Americans were becoming a nation of city dwellers. The concentration of many people into small areas unavoidably changed American life. Some of the biggest changes were those in the family. On farms, a large family wasa necessity. Everyone—from tiny children to elderly grandparents—was needed to perform chores so that the farm would produce a living. In the cities, however, many people began to think that a large family was a handicap. City families depended on wages, and wages were so low that they often were enough to support only one person. Even with both parents and all the school-age children working, life often was a struggle. Nonproductive children were a drain on the family's meager resources. Moreover, living quarters were small and difficult to find. A 3- or 4-room flat in the city was considered roomy, if not downright luxurious. Trying to provide child care was a majE problem. The family circle sometimes included an aunt, uncle, or grandparent who was willing to baby-sit while the parents worked. But some people left the children at home unattended. Others relied on such things as "Mother's Little Helper." This was a patent medicine, containing opium, that was given to a baby to make it sleep all dav long so that its parents could leave it alone while they went out to work. Lf*a " Hn. wtwn<l"n"l Uuwuin o" Photography M Gvorg* fuinw House Pochettes N V The disadvantages of having a large family in a city contributed to a growing interest in limiting family size. Scientific discoveries had led to methods of family planning. In the 1870's and 1880's, however, a number of Protestant church leaders had persuaded some states to make it illegal to distribute information or devices to prevent conception. As a result, such people as Margaret Sanger, 2 public health nurse, were often jailed for distributing information about prevention of conception. Family size was only one of the adjustments Americans faced in urban areas. They also had to get used to living in a metropolitan area—made up of a city, its suburbs, and outlying areas. Before the twentieth century, cities had grown by annexing, or taking over, the suburbs surrounding them. After about 1915, however, most cities stopped annexing. Although most suburban areas still depended on the city's facilities and prosperity, they did not come under the jurisdiction of the city government. Many now had their own local governments. As the number of governments increased, so did the difficulty of solving metropolitan problems. Soon after the new century opened, many Americans began viewing their nation's rapid economic growth with an uneasy concern. They became increasingly aware that although most of the people enjoyed a rising standard of living, many men, women, and children did not. As the United States became more industrialized, the evils seemed to spread. Some Americans came to believe that poverty and ignorance lay at the root of these evils. But many people believed that the social, economic, and political difficulties were caused by the increasing concentration of the nation's economic power in fewer and fewer hands. This concentration of power had brought about one of the most important changes in the nation's history. A group of the Rockefeller group offered no further opposition to Morgan. In the next few years, the Morgan and Rockefeller groups formed what was, in effect, one huge financial empire that stopped competition and prevented industrial struggle. In California, where economic opportunities for immigrants were greater than in the ghettos of the East, an unusual banking experiment got started. Amadeo Peter Giannini, born in San Jose of immigrant parents from Italy, started a bank that catered to the needs of Italian immigrants. The newcomers often distrusted banks run by Americans or could not obtain services or loans from them. With his Bank of Italy, which opened its first office in October 1904, Giannini brought branch banking to Italians in California. He gave them Italian-speaking tellers and performed various services, such as help with naturalization papers, free of charge. Ultimately, Giannini expanded the Bank of Italy beyond his ethnic group, changed the name to Bank of America, and made it the largest financial institution of its kind in the world. Material progress was one of the most striking features of the United States at the turn of the century. The very idea of progress became the center of philosophical and social discussions. Philosophers, educators, and social thinkers, became concerned with the practical measures needed to bring the benefits of material progress to the majority of the American people. Attacks on Economic Theories Professional economists attacked the ideas of Social Darwinism, laissez faire, and classical economics. They said that the assistance of the state in economic matters was necessary to human progress and that changing economic conditions had to be met by changing laws. Laissez faire, they said, was "unsafe in politics and unsound in morals." One of the most original critics of industrial society was Thorstein B. Veblen, a mid- western economist. In his first two books, The Theory of the Leisure Class (1899) and The Theory of Business Enterprise (1904), he rejected the idea that the wealthy were more fit than others. He attacked the economic and social practices of the rich and the laws of the classical economist. His writings encouraged economists to be suspicious of theories that described economic life as being governed by simple, unchanging laws. He pointed out that much of the consumption in the United States was intended to increase the user's social standing but was wasteful and unnecessary. Idealists Versus Pragmatists Philosophers, too, were affected by Darwin's theories and by the problems of the industrial society. Those who believed that ideals were most important in the life of humans formed a school of philosophy called idealism. The idealists tried to reconcile Darwin's idea of change through evolution with the traditional Christian idea of an unchanging God. The one major American philosopher who defended idealism was Josiah Royce of Harvard. Royce explained his beliefs in The Philosophy of Loyalty (1908). He believed that the quality in humans that raised them above the level of animals was loyalty, which included the ideals of devotion, unselfishness, and sacrifice. Adult immigrants attend a naturalization class to prepare for the oral citizenship test. Most such dasss emphasized reading and writing in English, for used that language was considered a sign of "Amenta* ness " People who believed in the melting-pot theory looked upon education as the flame under the pot The benefits of education were sparingly extended* J blacks and Indians. c@e 'Immigrants "There she lies, the great Melting-Pot—listenl Can't you hear the roaring and the bubbling? There gapes her mouth—the harbour where a thousand mammoth feeders come from the ends of the world to pour in their human freight. Ah, what a stirring and a seethingl Celt and Latin, Slav and Teuton, Greek and Syrian, —black and yellow—" In this way an English writer described the United States in 1910. Like many other people, he viewed America as a place where many cultures fused to become something distinctively American. This was the "melting-pot" theory. A major idea in the melting-pot theory was that immigrants had come to the United States in search of freedom and jobs. Certainly, political and economic conditions caused great immigration between 1850 and 1920. Many of the English, Swedish, and German immigrants were grain farmers who had been wiped out by competition from cheap American and Russian wheat. Others were skilled industrial workers put out of work by a depression. Thousands of Chinese emigrated during the Tai-ping Rebellion, which seriously disrupted their economy. Some Germans came to escape Prussian draft laws. In Austria-Hungary, the breakup of large estates displaced many people who could not support themselves on small tracts of land in the late 1880's, farm workers from southern Italy and Greece emigrated when fruit growing became unprofitable. Some southern and eastern Europeans emigrated to escape religious persecution. Political unrest In Russia In the 1880 s encouraged anti- Jewish riots and brought harsh restrictive laws. Finally, hundreds of thousands of Jews fled to escape death in the terrible pogroms of 1891 and 1905. Far fewer of the later immigrants became farmers They filled the need for industrial workers Frequently, newcomers joined others of their nationality in rural or urban areas Some immigrants tried to preserve their language and customs. But many factors encouraged them to drop their old language ana to take on some new customs. Northern and Central Europe Eastern and Southern Europe Britain, Ireland, Scandinavia. Belgium. Netherlands, Russia and Baltic Slates. Romania, Italy, France, Switzerland* Germany, Poland, Finland, Bulgaria, Turkey, Greece, Spain, Portugal Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia In September and November 1899, Secretary of State John Hay sent notes to Britain, Germany, Russia, Japan, France, and Italy. In the notes he asked those nations to support the "Open Door"—equal commercial opportunity for all nations in China. All the replies were either qualified or evasive. Yet in March 1900, Hay announced that the powers had given him assurances. In June a violent anticolonial uprising, the Boxer Rebellion, broke out in China. Powerful bands of Chinese nationalists, known as Boxers, overran the capital and besieged the foreign legations in the city. In August an international army of European, American, and Japanese troops finally rescued the trapped foreigners. Secretary of State Hay feared that some of the powers would use the Boxer troubles as an excuse to take Chinese territory. In July 1900, at the height of the crisis, he restated his Open Door policy. He asked the other great powers to preserve China's territorial daims as well as freedom of trade. The other powers did not pay much attention to Hay's policy. What saved China from dismemberment was the mutual jealousy of the powers. Nonetheless, Hay had made it dear that although the United States would not back the Open Door policy with force, it was concerned over China's fate. The Russo-Japanese War Russia used the Boxer troubles to gain control of Manchuria. Russia's moves aroused the Japanese, who also wished to take over Manchuria. Late in 1903, the two nations tried to reach an understanding about the future of Manchuria and Korea. When Russia would not accept Japan's terms, Japan broke off negotiations. In February 1904, the Japanese attacked the Russian fleet at Port Arthur, Manchuria. All the land fighting in the ensuing Russo-Japanese War took place on Chinese soil. As soon as the war began. President Theodore Roosevelt reasserted the Open Door policy. He asked Japan and Russia to respect China's neutrality and independence, but neither did so. Although the Japanese were winning victory after victory, the war was driving them to bankruptcy. In the spring of 1905, they asked Roosevelt to mediate, Russia agreed to peace negotiations at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. At the peace conference, Roosevelt helped arrange a compromise that led to the Treaty of Portsmouth (1905), ending the war. The compromise kept defeated Russia in East Asia and contributed to a balance of power between Russia and Japan. Japanese Reactions The Russo-Japanese War marked the first victory of a modern Asian nation over a major western power. It gave new life to nationalism in Asia, confirmed Japan as a world power, and made Japan the dominant power in Korea and southern Manchuria. Almost everyone but the Japanese praised Roosevelt's peacemaking efforts. The Japanese people believed that the compromise arranged by Roosevelt had robbed their nation of the fruits of victory. Anti-American riots swept over Japan. Developments within the United States increased tension with Japan. In October 1906, the San Francisco school board's segregation of Japanese children touched off an international crisis and started talk of war. President Roosevelt was fond of quoting an old West African proverb, "Speak softly and carry a big stick." While he negotiated with the Japanese, he held his big stick—the navy—in reserve, Roosevelt persuaded the San Franciscans to end their segregation. In return, the Japanese government promised to stop the immigration of Japanese laborers to mainland United States. involvement 'With £'Mexico The growth of the railroads and the rapid expansion of irrigation farming after 1900 brought great changes to the southwestern United States. The need for a labor force for growing, packing, and shipping crops encouraged large numbers of Mexicans to migrate into that region. Between 1901 and 1910, 49,000 Mexicans officially entered the United States; between 1911 and 1920. the number increased to 219,000; It continued to increase during the following decade. Thousands more were illegally brought in by labor contractors. Most of the Mexicans settled in Texas, Arizona, New Mexico, and California. Many had come lo gel away from the revolutions in Mexico. Conflicts in Mexico occasionally spread Into Texas and New Mexico. By 1911, when Porfirio Diaz fell from power in Mexico, there was continuous fighting in the border areas. Many of I tne raids into United States territory were followed by reprisals against Mexicans. Diaz was replaced by several leaders in rapid succession. In 1915. President Wilson recognized the Mexican government led by Venus- tiano Carranza As Carranza took over, one of his chief generals. Pancho Villa, broke away. Villa, who had led the revolutionary forces in the northern states of Mexico, hoped to force the United States to intervene in the revolution and help him gain enough popular support to defeat Carranza. He and his followers raided American towns in 1915 and 1916. These raids caused a wave of public anger. National guard regiments were called out to guard the border, and Woodrow Wilson sent a punitive expedition to Mexico to stop Villa's troops. The punitive expedition was unable to catch Villa, but its actions brought the United States to the brink of full-scale war with Mexico. Both the Mexican and United States governments wished to avoid war. In February 1917, Wilson withdrew United States troops from Mexico. Carranza's government adopted a formal constitution designed to bring democratic institutions to Mexico. Villa leads his troops in a raid on the United States jobs. Many Protestants resented the influx of Catholics and Jews from southern and eastern Europe. Even employers now favored restrictions because they believed that many of the new immigrants were radicals. Pressure from these groups led to the passage of the Emergency Quota Act in May 1921 and the National Origins Act of 1924. The 1921 law created a quota system by which the number of immigrants allowed from a given nation was based on the number of persons of that nationality living in the United States in the base year, 1910. The 1924 law changed the base year from 1910 to 1890. It favored northwestern Europeans over the southern and eastern, because a larger percentage of persons of northwestern European descent lived in the United 5tates in 1890 than in 1910. Most Asians were completely barred, but immigrants from Latin America and Canada still had fairly free access to the United States. Passage of the prohibition amendment did not end some peoples thirst for alcoholic beverages The sale of "bath- tub gin" in "speakeasies' — illegal bars—flourished Agents of the treasury department tried to break up illegal distilling operations and to shut down speakeasies Left: Two male prohibition agents model their disguises Right: John Held s certoon "The Talkie" captures (he busy mood of a Hollywood movie set uld establish a system whereby farm ucts would be sold at two prices—a low world price and a higher price in the United States. The government would buy the farm wrpluses at the American price, sell them abroad at the world price, and recover its ses through a special tax on farmers. The McNary-Haugen bill was passed by Congress in revised form in 1927 and 1928. ilidge vetoed it both times. Although or- ilzed farmers gained a number of benefits from the government, they failed to get their t important measure. They failed primar- because the President and big business rests in the East opposed the bill. Restricting Immigration Many Americans were no longer willing to Blow unrestricted immigration into the United States. Organized labor wanted to i off immigration in order to keep newer* from competing for the available League. Coolidge and Hoover continued and expanded such cooperation. In 1927, the failure of a disarmament conference in Geneva, Switzerland, contributed to a loss of public confidence in disarmament as a means of insuring peace. But the peace crusaders had turned to another idea—a movement to outlaw war. Acting upon this idea, on August 27,1928, the representatives of fifteen nations met in Paris to sign the Kellogg-Briand Pact. This treaty pledged the signers to renounce war "as an instrument of national policy" and to try to settle their disputes by peaceful means. In time, sixty-two nations signed the pact. In April 1930, a naval conference in London produced the London Naval Treaty. It extended the "holiday" on naval shipbuilding agreed to in the Five-Power Naval Treaty. The London treaty also applied limitations to the building of smaller warships, such as cruisers, destroyers, and submarines. This treaty, most of which was accepted by the five major naval powers—the United States, Britain, Japan, France, and Italy— was the first in modern world history to limit all categories of ships. A War in Asia Although the United States and Japan had reached an accommodation on naval matters, tension between them had arisen again when Congress enacted the immigration law of 1924. While the act was under consideration, the Japanese had protested to the American government, saying that the new law would violate the "gentlemen's agree- ment," which they had carefully observed. Regardless of the Japanese protests. Congress went ahead with the law. The bad feelings aroused by this law continued throughout the 1920's, but later in this period the area of Japanese-American disagreements shifted to the Chinese mainland. Beginning in 1925, the Chinese went through their second revolution of the twentieth century. The leader of this revolution was General Chiang Kai-shek, who had taken up the work of Sun Yat-sen, the founder of the Chinese Nationalist party. Chiang clashed with both the Soviets and the Japanese. In 1929, when Chiang's Nationalists tried to take over the Soviet Union's holdings in northern Manchuria, Soviet troops invaded the province and defeated the Chinese. Secretary of State Henry L. Stimson tried to stop the fighting by invoking the Kellogg-Briand Pact, which both China and the Soviet Union had signed. The Soviets said the United States was not the enforcer of the pact and should mind its own business. Japan was alarmed by Chiang's efforts to unify China and control Manchuria. Blaming the Chinese for a mysterious explosion on a Japanese railway near Mukden, Manchuria, late in 1931 the Japanese invaded southern Manchuria. Within a few months, Japan had conquered the province and set it up as a puppet state called Manchukuo. Shortly after the Japanese invasion, China appealed to the United States, as sponsor of the Kellogg Pact, and to the League of Nations, under the covenant, to help keep the peace. Neither could do much. The League appointed a commission, which investigated the dispute and later condemned Japan as an aggressor. Secretary of State Stimson warned Japan that it was violating both the Kellogg-Briand Pact and the Nine-Power Open Door Treaty. Then on January 7,1932 he announced what has become known as the Stimson Doctrine. It said the United States would not recognize Japan's gains made in violation of the Open Door principle and the Kellogg-Briand Pact. Neither the League's condemnation nor Stimson's nonrecognition doctrine stopped the Japanese. Japan retained Manchuria arid withdrew from the League. Years of Hope and Despair The 1920's and 1930's are usually viewed as periods of contrast—one being an era of hope and promise, the other a time of despair. While the decades did greatly differ, in terms of the nation's culture they were more alike than they were different. Culture is often defined as the customs, arts, and technology of a people. It rarely changes rapidly, for it usually builds on everything that has come earlier. Thus the customs, arts, and technology of the 1930's were little more than a continuation of those in the 1920's. The biggest differences were in tone, not substance. A Charleston contest in the mtd-1920's. In both prosperity and depression, Americans tried to adjust to an economy based on the use of machines. Though machines made it possible to increase the production of all kinds of goods, they also threw many people out of work. In some regions, great numbers of people lost their jobs and had to seek work elsewhere. Population Changes During these decades, for the first time in three centuries, the rate of population growth declined. The birth rate began to fall in the 1920's, and it reached its lowest point in the 1930's. The new immigration laws also helped lower the growth rate by restricting the number of immigrants. The census of 1920 showed that more than half the people in the United States now lived in towns and cities. A great number of the newest city dwellers were farm laborers who had been replaced by machines. Manv of these workers were blacks who had moved from farms in the South to cities in the North or West. Most of the western states registered great population gains, while states in the East and Midwest grew but little. Some states actually During the war, farm population dropped 17 percent, but each worker's output almost doubled. This increase resulted from greater use of machinery and from better fertilizers. American farms met the food needs of the armed forces, the domestic market, and many civilians in liberated areas overseas. Curbing Inflation Prosperity combined with a decrease in consumer goods produced inflation. Americans had plenty of money available for spending, but sellers had few goods for sale. As a result, the prices of available goods went up. The government wanted to control inflation, which could increase the cost of the war and cause discontent at home. In January 1942, Congress passed the Emergency Price Control Act. This law made the Office of Price Administration (OPA) responsible for curbing inflation. When the OPA failed in this job, Congress passed an anti-inflation law that froze wages, rents, and food prices. Another attack on inflation was the rationing of scarce goods. The government limited the purchase of automobile tires, gasoline, meat, canned food, sugar, coffee, butter, shoes, and other items. People could buy these things if they had stamps for them from ration books issued by the government. Some people cheated by going to "black markets," where goods were sold illegally at high prices. However, the economic controls of World War II assured most Americans a fairer share of available goods than had the less controlled economy of World War I. The government sold war bonds and imposed new and higher taxes, both to fight inflation and to pay for the war. Everyone, from the factory worker to the millionaire, was encouraged to buy bonds. Eight war- bond drives brought more than 100 billion dollars into the treasury. The government raised even more money through taxes, which were increased to drain off some of the people's buying power. As a result of the Revenue Act of October 1942. the income tax became a "mass tax." Millions of Americans who had never before filed an income tax return now had to do so. Some had incomes as low as S625 a year. To make collections simple and easy, Congress, in June 1943, passed a payroll deduction law that provided for the withholding of money for taxes when it was earned. Restricting Civil Liberties Violations of free speech and personal liberty were relatively few. Organized hate campaigns against Germans and Italians were rare. But an important exception to the government's good record on civil liberties was its treatment of Japanese Americans on the West Coast. In February 1942, Roosevelt authorized the army to exclude all persons of Japanese ancestry from "military areas" on the West Coast. Of the 112,000 persons affected by the order, 70,000 were American citizens born in the United States. Later, the commanding general on the West Coast ordered the Japanese Americans to special camps surrounded by barbed wire and guarded by soldiers. Beginning in July 1942 some of the Nisei, citizens born in the United States of Japanese parents, were allowed to leave the camps to attend college, harvest crops, resettle in the Middle West, or volunteer for duty with the army. All first had to he cleared as loyal by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In December 1944, the Supreme Court ruled on two cases questioning the constitutionality of the evacuation. In one case, the Court said that the government's action was constitutional because it was prompted b)t "military necessity." In the other case, announced the same day, the Court said that the government could not keep a loyal citizen from returning to his or her home. Study in hysteria Anti-Japanese prejudice was nothing new in the United States. Immigrants from Japan (called Issei). unlike those from Europe, had never been allowed to become United States citizens. Their children, called Nisei, were citizens by birth. The bornbing of Pearl Harbor was followed by a period of anti-Japanese hysteria fostered in great measure by false rumors. Some newspapers on the West Coast hinted that Japanese Americans had helped the attackers. A wide range of groups in California—including farm, labor, veterans, fraternal, and political or- ganizations—as well as major politicians, supported efforts to remove Japanese Americans trom the West Coast. The opposition to removal was limited. The American Civil Liberties Union and Quaker groups were among the few working to oppose removal. The Japanese Americans were first taken to assembly centers made from existing facilities, such as race track stables. They were later removed to eight camps in semidesert areas in me West and to two camps in Arkansas. They lived in tarpaper-covered barracks in which each family had a small room with thin walls. The Japanese Americans in Hawaii did not suffer the same fate as mainlanders Even though they lived in a more strategic area, they were allowed to stay in their homes and jobs. As time passed, the falsity of the rumors became apparent. A year after the attack on Pearl Harbor. Bill Henry, a columnist for the Los Angeles Times, wrote: "The FBI chief says the yarns about the dead Jap flyers with McKinley High School (Honolulu) rings on their fingers, the stories of the arrows in the cane fields pointing toward Pearl Harbor, and the yarns about Jap vegetable trucks blocking the roadway to Pearl Harbor that day are all unadulterated hooey." Throughout the war, not one Japanese American was charged with committing a disloyal act. In 1943 the army formed a segregated unit composed of Japanese American soldiers. The 442nd Regimental Combat Team fought in Italy. France, and Germany and won more decorations for bravery than any other American unit. The war did not stop some Americans from expressing their other traditional prejudices. The summer of 1943 brought riots directed against Mexican Americans in Los Angeles, other parts of the Southwest, and Chicago. Riots involving blacks and whites broke out in Detroit, New York, and other major cities. Although the rioting was sparked by various minor incidents, its root cause lay in resentment and frustration over social changes brought by the war. "Rosie the Riveter" was a symbol of American women during Ihe war Large numbers ot women took jobs m defense plants, and many joined the military services Mexico. As Oppenheimer witnessed the blinding explosion and swelling poisonous cloud that spread over earth and sky, words from a sacred Hindu text flashed through his mind: "1 am become Death, destroyer of the worlds." A new era of atomic wonders—and fears—had begun. Developing New Weapons Like workers, farmers, and business people, scientists contributed their skills to the struggle against the Axis powers. Although the influence of science had grown greatly in the 1930's, the United States government had not done much to adapt scientific research to military uses. Germany, on the other hand, was using its scientists to produce new and powerful weapons. Fear of German scientific developments led President Roosevelt to set up, in June 1941, the Office of Scientific Research and Development. This office organized scientists to develop and perfect weapons and supplies needed to win the war. Allied scientists forged ahead in the use of an electronic instrument called "radar." This invention, perfected and put into use by the British, detected airplanes and ships by means of a radio beam. Radar could also guide shells against enemy craft. The most devastating weapon of all was the atomic bornb. A major step in its creation came on December 2, 1942, when Enrico Fermi and other physicists working in Chicago achieved the first self-sustaining nuclear chain reaction. Under the direction of Dr. J. Robert Oppenheimer, other scientists at Los Alamos, New Mexico, harnessed the power of a chain reaction and built a bornb. At 5:30 a m. on July 16, 1945, the world's first atomic bornb was detonated near Alamogordo, New As soon as the United States had declared war against the Axis powers, Britain's prime minister, Winston Churchill, crossed the Atlantic to talk to President Roosevelt about worldwide military strategy. Churchill knew that his exhausted nation could not continue alone the fight against the Nazis. Yet he feared that the sneak attack on Pearl Harbor might cause Americans to concentrate on the destruction of Japan rather than of Germany Roosevelt and his closest advisers agreed, however, that Germany was the more dangerous foe. Hitler controlled more people and greater resources than Japan, and Germany had a headstart on work to develop atomic bornbs and guided missiles. Roosevelt and Churchill decided to concentrate on defeating Germany first. They would give China only limited help and would try to keep the Japanese from advancing further rather than attempt to push them back. The Americans and British would pour most of their troops, guns, planes, and tanks into the European theater of war. Submarine and Air Attacks To defeat Germany, the United States had to get its guns, planes, and soldiers across the Atlantic. Hitler was determined to prevent that, 5oon after the United States entered the war, Germany shifted its sub- defenders held off the Japanese for five months. The death tolls at Bataan and Cor- regidor were staggering. A great number of the troops were Mexican Americans who had been stationed in the Philippines because, like many Filipinos, they spoke Spanish. Although the troops were captured, their fighting spirit inspired Americans at home. Another boost to American morale came from naval attacks on Japan. In April 1942 a squadron of army planes bornbed targets in the Tokyo area. While the attacks had little strategic value, they had great psychological value. Many Americans, working on the home front to rebuild the navy and build up the army, viewed these raids as partial revenge for the attack on Pearl Harbor. The importance of air power became apparent in two major battles in 1942. Early in A convoy of aircraft carriers steams through the Pacific. Until these "floating islands ' proved their worth in battle, some military leaders opposed using them They feared the thin-decked carriers were too vulnerable and too slow. the year, after easy conquests elsewhere, the Japanese decided to strike at southern New Guinea. Victory there would open the way to an attack on Australia. In May, a Japanese fleet moved southward into the Coral Sea toward Port Moresby. The United States Navy knew of the planned attack and sent two aircraft carriers and some cruisers against the invaders. Before anyone on the Japanese and American ships could see the ships of the other side, planes from the carrier decks of both sides struck. Though both fleets suffered heavy damage, the Battle of the Coral Sea (May 7-8, 1942) ended as an American victory. The Japanese retreated without trying to land troops at Port Moresby. Australia was saved by the first sea battle in history in which all fighting was done by carrier-based planes. Admiral lsoroku Yamamoto, the commander of Japan's combined fleet, decided to strike next at Midway Island. He hoped to use it as a stepping-stone in the capture of Hawaii and to destroy what remained of the from Wisconsin. His actions introduced a new word into the American language: McCarthyism, the making of indiscriminate and irresponsible charges of political disloyalty. McCarthyism first appeared in February 1950, when the senator claimed that the State Department was "thoroughly infested with Communists." As chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, McCarthy accused and frightened many people over a period of four years. But he never proved his charges. Because of his unscrupulous methods and careless accusations, McCarthy caused much controversy. The courts rendered some decisions that made it easier to prosecute Communists. In 1940, Congress had passed the Smith Act, which prohibited the advocacy of the violent overthrow of the government. In 1949 eleven leaders of the Communist party were convicted of violating the Smith Act. The Supreme Court upheld the convictions in 1951 and held the law to be constitutional. At the same time, the government struck at Soviet spies. A trial in England in 1950 revealed that Dr. Klaus Fuchs, a physicist who had worked on the American atomic bornb project, had slipped nuclear secrets to the Russians. Fuchs's conviction led to the arrest of several spies in the United States. The case of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg created the greatest stir. The Rosenbergs were convicted of espionage in 1951 and given the death penalty. Congress reacted to the spy trials and the Communist exposures by passing the McCarran-Nixon Internal Security Act of 1950. This complex law required all Communist and Communist-linked organizations to register with the government. It also made it unlawful for anyone to conspire to perform any act that would "substantially contribute" to the establishment of a dictatorship in the United States. "In a free country," Truman said when he vetoed the bill, "we punish men for the crimes they commit, but never for the opinions they have," Congress overrode his veto. Two years later. Congress overrode another of Truman's vetoes to pass the McCar- ran-Walter Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952. This new law ended the total exclusion of Asians. It gave them a small quota and allowed them to become citizens through naturalization. Yet it continued the discriminatory features of the old quota system against southern and eastern Europeans. It even tightened some of the restrictions in order to prevent Communists from emigrating to the United States. During the immediate postwar years, no part of the world had greater discontent and unrest than Asia. There, strong nationalist movements sought independence from foreign control. The Philippines Both Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry 5 Truman sympathized with some of these movements. Their attitude toward the Philippines reflected United States friendliness toward Asian nationalism. In 1934, the Americans had promised the Philippines independence ten years hence. During the war—to strengthen Filipino resistance to the Japanese—President Roosevelt promised that once Japan was defeated, e fully independent Republic of the Philippines would be established. President Truman carried out this pledge. On July 4, 1946, when the Republic of the Philippines was proclaimed, the United States surrendered control over its former colony. Special defense treaties bound the United States and the Philippines, but the Filipinos ran their own government. During the recession of 1957, which lasted nine months, industrial production decreased 14.3 percent and unemployment increased by about 4.6 percent. In some parts of the country, even after economic recovery, unemployment remained high. Labor leaders urged the government to establish a public works program to create jobs, but the Eisenhower administration refused to do so. Many congressmen were hostile to certain labor unions because congressional investigations had uncovered corruption among union leaders. In 1959, Congress enacted the Landrum-Griffin Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Law to clean up the internal affairs of unions and to outlaw abuses by union officials. Automation affected more than just industrial centers. The factory farms that had grown up in World War II were becoming increasingly machine oriented. This was especially true in California, where the terrain and corporate land ownership suited the large-scale use of farm machinery. Cesar Chavez, director of a community organization, led a fight in the 1950's to end the use of braceros—contract farm laborers from foreign countries—when local farm workers were unemployed. His major goal was to find jobs for fellow Mexican Americans. The seeds of a revival of the women's movement were being sown in the 1950's. Many of the women who had left jobs in industry after World War II now began looking for employment outside the home. But when women took paying jobs, they usually were given lower salaries than men doing the same work and they had fewer chances for advancement. Many women felt that such policies violated their rights. Some sought help from the government in the form of laws. A new push began for passage of the Equal Rights Amendment, which had been proposed in every session of Congress since 1923. In the 1950's Martha Griffiths, a newly elected congresswoman from Michigan, became chief sponsor of the proposed amendment. Internal Changes Pressure to pass statehood bills for Alaska and Hawaii had grown in the 1940's. Many Alaskans wanted to rid themselves of restrictive territorial laws and get more help in developing the area's resources. After years of congressional debate, the state of Alaska was admitted to the Union in 1959. Action on Hawaii's bid for statehood had been deferred when the Korean War began. Then Congress stalled because of party arguments. Statehood was finally achieved in 1959. Indian policies were also debated during the 1950's. Some lawmakers felt that the Indian Reorganization Act was not improving conditions for Indians; others were concerned about its cost. The Hoover Commission recommended policies that would encourage Indians to leave the reservations and suggested the transfer of Indian assistance programs to the states. This policy of "termi- nation" of both tribal unity and tribal ties to the federal government was favored by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Congress quickly shifted responsibility for Indian programs to the states. In the late 1950's, termination policies faced criticism as it became obvious that not enough planning for protection of Indian rights was included; Indians were urged to relocate in cities without adequate job opportunities; government services were withdrawn when no adequate substitutes existed. Congress therefore began reconsidering termination policies. The performing arts—music, dance, and drama—dominated the culture of the 1940's and 1950's. Much of the time these arts were After service in the navy in World War II, Nixon won a seat in the House of Representatives. He gained national attention during his first term by his campaign against Communists in government. In 1950, Nixon won a Senate seat. Two years later, Eisenhower chose him as his running mate. After his I960 defeat by Kennedy, Nixon returned to California. In 1962 he ran for governor but lost. He returned to the practice of law, first in California, then in New York. But he could not stay out of politics. In 1964 and 1966 he worked for Republican candidates all over the country. His grateful party made him its presidential nominee in 1968. The 1972 Election The midterm elections of 1970 produced mixed results. The Democrats gained eleven seats in the House but lost two seats in the Senate. In the statehouses, they gained eleven governorships. Encouraged by these results, eleven Democrats entered the primaries for their party's presidential nomination in 1972. The early front runner was Edmund Muskie. He faced stiff competition from Hubert Humphrey and from George Wallace, again a Democrat. A gunshot once more changed the course of a presidential campaign. At a political rally in Laurel, Maryland, in May 1972, a 21-year- old bus boy shot Wallace, paralyzing him. Wallace was knocked out of the race. Meanwhile, a new front runner was emerging. Senator George 5. McGovern of South Dakota won the Democratic nomination. He chose Thomas F. Eagleton, a young senator from Missouri, as his running mate. A month later, Eagleton was forced off the ticket after it was disclosed that he had a history of emotional illness. McGovern replaced him with R. Sargent Shriver, a former director of the Peace Corps. Nixon and Agnew were renominated by the Republicans. Nixon did little campaigning. He kept himself before the public as President, not as a politician. McGovern tried to make Vietnam policy the campaign's main issue. But Nixon outflanked him. Twelve days before the election, the President's foreign-policy adviser, who had been negotiating an end to the war, announced that "peace is at hand." Deprived of his main issue and beset by fighting within his party, McGovern lost. Nixon got more than 60 percent of the vote. But Democrats increased their margin in the statehouses and held their own in Congress. Two Historic Resignations Though Nixon and Agnew had won an overwhelming victory, neither man served out his term. On October 10, 1973. Agnew resigned; he then appeared in federal court and pleaded "no contest" to a charge of income- tax evasion. The judge fined him $10,000 and put him on three years' probation. Nixon's fall from power resulted from an incident during the election campaign, In June 1972, burglars had been caught breaking into the Democratic party's offices in the Watergate Hotel in Washington. They were trying to install electronic "bugging" equipment. Investigators uncovered evidence that the burglars had been hired by the Committee to Re-Elect the President. The "Watergate affair" had little effect on the election but became a major scandal In 1973. Emerging evidence hinted that the President or his staff was trying to cover up the incident and stop the investigation. In February 1974, the House of Representatives asked its Judiciary Committee to study the evidence and decide if grounds existed for impeaching the President. Late in July the committee voted out three articles of impeachment, charging that Nixon had obstructed justice, abused presidential powers, and tried to block the impeachment process. On August 5, new evidence came to light that slogan "black power," which was interpreted differently by almost every person who heard it or used it. Some Americans thought it meant "black supremacy," while others thought it simply meant that blacks should have more power over their own lives. Some Americans believed that the philosophy of the black nationalists contributed to the riots in cities. In 1966, black unrest was again evident across the nation. The summer of 1967 brought the worst riots yet. In July, rioters in Detroit went on a week's rampage, looting, burning, and killing. Entire blocks went up in flames. Only the power of federal troops put down the disorders. In the rioting, forty-three persons were killed, 2,000 were injured, 5,000 were made homeless, 5,000 were arrested. Damage was estimated at more than 200 million dollars. President Johnson appointed the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders to investigate the black unrest. The commission published its findings early in 1968. It blamed the racist attitudes of the country's white majority for the repeated summer riots. "Our nation," the report concluded, "is moving toward two societies, one black, one white—separate and unequal." Within a few months, events dramatized this assessment. On April 4, 1968, a white man in Memphis, Tennessee, assassinated Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. That murder set off shock waves of riots in more than fifty cities. In Washington, D.C., President Johnson had to call in troops to restore order. The whole nation mourned King's death. More than 150,000 persons, including some of the nation's leaders, attended the funeral, and millions watched the events on television. No person who had not held high public office had ever been so honored in death. King's murder gave a final boost to more civil rights legislation. The Civil Rights Act of 1968 outlawed discrimination in the sale and rental of most real estate. A Shift of Focus While black militancy persisted, widespread violence subsided in the next few years. Blacks concentrated on fighting their battles in the political arena. By 1972, black political leaders had formed blocs of their own. In 1960, there had been four blacks in Congress; by 1973, there were fifteen. At least eight cities had black mayors. Nevertheless, blacks still had a higher rate of unemployment than did whites, and black children usually had to attend segregated schools. President Nixon was less responsive to black demands than Kennedy and Johnson had been. In 1971, in Swann v. Char- lotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education and four companion cases, federal courts ruled that the busing of children from their neighborhoods to schools at a distance for purposes of integration was proper. This ruling met with violent opposition from many whites and became an issue in the presidential election in 1972. Nixon said that he did "not believe that busing to achieve racial balance is in the interest of better education." Ethnic Consciousness Many groups had a stake in the civil rights crusade. Puerto Ricans, Chicanos (Mexican Americans), and American Indians challenged white control of American society with increasing militancy. Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino Americans also worked to protect their rights. In several instances, Puerto Ricans in New York and New Jersey and Chicanos in Los Angeles rioted. They suffered from high unemployment, bias in education, and continuing discrimination in housing. In October 1971, Spanish-speaking civil rights leaders filed suit against four federal agencies for discrimination in employment. They noted that Spanish-speaking people made up 7 percent of the population but held only 2.9 percent of the federal jobs. bargain for teachers. In the late sixties, as teachers, policemen, firemen, postal workers, and others felt the pinch of inflation and recession, they joined unions. Strikes by other government workers had once been novelties. Now they became common. The unionization of its employees involved the government more and more in labor disputes. In March 1970, for the first time in the nation's history, postal workers went on strike. At its height, the strike involved more than 200,000 workers. President Nixon declared a state of national emergency and sent troops to New York City to try to move the mail. The strike was settled after the government offered pay raises and a reorganization of the postal system. Some Americans expressed alarm over the vulnerability of vital services to what they called a "misuse of union power." Generally, when a major labor dispute threatened the national economy, national security, or the political situation, the government stepped in to work for a settlement. Government treated labor policy as a part of national economic policy. One of the most widely publicized labor disputes of the sixties was that of grape pickers in California. The people involved were mostly Mexican American farm workers. Migrant farm workers were not covered by federal labor laws and had been largely unorganized. The strike began in 1965, but it did not gain momentum until Cesar E. Chavez, a leader of the United Farm Workers Organizing Committee, made it more than a labor dispute. Led by Chavez, it became "La Causa," almost a religious movement. In 1968, Chavez called for a consumer boycott of California table grapes. Publicized by news of Chavez's hunger strikes and supported by national unions, the boycott caught on. Housewives and students picketed supermarkets, and bumper stickers asked Americans not to eat grapes. Sales of Striking farm workers march in California. Agri- business," large corporations, ran many of the huge farms In that state. La Causa was backed with religious fervor by workers who sought better pay, improved working conditions, and union recognition table grapes fell. In July 1970 the grape growers signed an agreement with Chavez's union, and the strike ended. Public sympathy helped bring victory, but it was not a lasting victory. Kennedy's Economic Policy When Eisenhower left office, the nation was in the midst of a recession that struck some sections hard but barely touched others. With 8.1 percent of the labor force out of jobs, unemployment was much too high. Two weeks after his inauguration, President Kennedy asked Congress for an extension of insurance payments to the unemployed, an increase in the minimum-wage rate, a boost in social security payments, and a program to clear slums and build public housing. Congress turned these requests into law. It also passed the Area Redevelopment Act, which made federal aid available to bring industries into areas with chronic unemployment. In 1962, Congress supplemented this law with the first broad public works program since the New Deal. Before the end of 1961, the economy began to perk up. Kennedy could not, however, get Congress to back his program of long-range economic reform. The old coalition of southern Democrats and conservative Republicans that controlled key positions in Congress also opposed much of Kennedy's program. Kennedy felt that economic reform would be hurt by inflation. In 1962 he had a showdown with leaders of the steel industry over policies that he believed were inflationary. Kennedy had asked the steel companies to keep prices down and had urged the unions to hold their wage demands in line with in- When President Eisenhower left office, he made a farewell address in which he warned against the growth of "a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions." He urged Americans not to allow generals and business executives, leaders of the "military- industrial complex," to control government and upset the idea of balanced government. Throughout the sixties and early seventies, Americans wrestled with a "guns-or-butter" dilemma: If the government concentrated on building up military defenses, it would not be able to afford programs designed to ease social problems. Yet a nation's social condition is its first line of defense, and if the United States ignored its social problems, its defenses would be weak. Government finances were affected by the distribution of population. The United States had more old people and more young people than at any other time in its history. Most of them were not major taxpayers. The cost of supporting government programs therefore hit hard at the people in the middle. Population Characteristics In the 1940's the birth rate skyrocketed I and continued to do so through most of the 1950's, though it then began to decline steadily. By 1972 the birth rate was the lowest since full record-keeping began in 1917. Improvements in medicine, nutrition, and sanitation had made possible a longer life for the average American. A baby born in 1900 was expected to live 49 years; in 1950, 68 years; and in 1970, almost 71 years. The postwar baby boom and the longer life expectancy resulted in a population consisting of a higher proportion than in the past of I both the very young and the very old. Since the increase in population had come without much immigration, the proportion of People or Machines? 1960-1972 foreign-born to native Americans dropped. The white population in the 1960's and 1970's became more homogeneous. The nonwhite population also increased. According to the census of 1970, nonwhites numbered 25.5 million, of which 22.6 million were black. The majority of blacks no longer lived in the South. In 1940 the eleven states of the old Confederate South contained 69 percent of the nation's black people; in 1970, only 45 percent. Blacks usually went to cities in New York, California, Michigan, Illinois, and New Jersey. In 1970, New York had the largest black population of any city, but Washington, Gary, Newark, Atlanta, and other smaller cities had black majorities. Americans continued the long-term pattern of moving from country to cities and from cities to suburbs. During the 1960's the proportion of Americans living in rural areas dropped from 30.1 percent to 26.5 percent. By 1970 there were 53.6 million rural rev idents, 9.7 million living on farms. The number of farm people had decreased by almost 6 million. Americans left the farms for many reasons, but mechanization of agriculture was probably the most common. In the forties, fifties, and sixties, newer cities in the West and Southwest showed the most growth. But the population of all cities did not keep pace with the growth of population in the suburbs that surrounded them. People were becoming concentrated in great metropolitan areas, such as New York City and its suburbs or Los Angeles and its neighboring communities. By 1970, suburbanites numbered 74.9 million and made up the largest single bloc of the population. Medical Care President Johnson had interpreted his victory in 1964 as an endorsement of his pro- world. Yet in the decades after World War II, many Americans were dissatisfied with the schools. Education had become increasingly important as machines had become more and more complicated. The technological society demanded highly trained, literate men and women to run its machines. College degrees were required for many jobs, and graduate degrees were needed for most professions, In the late sixties, more than one-fourth of all Americans were enrolled in some program of formal education. Administrators had difficulty in keeping standards high while expanding their schools. Teachers' salaries were low, and school buildings were overcrowded and inadequate in many parts of the country. The richest states could afford well-equipped schools and good salaries for teachers. But poorer states could not spend nearly so much, even though some of these states spent a larger part of their income on education. Many people felt that the quality of education could be improved and the soaring costs cut through the use of teaching machines, television, audio-visual aids, and computers. Attempts to develop such materials forced educators to study the learning process more carefully than before. By the seventies, the use of teaching machines had stalled. The most pressing problem was that of providing education for poor people, many of whom were black or Spanish-speaking. To help improve education, Congress passed the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. It provided billions of dollars in federal funds for the nation's classrooms. One of the most highly publicized programs sponsored by the federal government was called Head Start. It tried to prepare disadvantaged children for school before they entered first grade. It was hoped that these children could then compete successfully with middle-class children. An important nationwide educational experiment began in November 1969, when the Corporation for Public Broadcasting launched a series called "Sesame Street." This was the most intensive effort ever made to use television to reach and teach young children. It used cartoons, skits, and other techniques to gain and hold the attention of preschool children while explaining concepts, words, and numbers. Broadcast over hundreds of stations, "Sesame Street" won the acclaim of children, educators, and critics. Special programs and education in general were expensive. In the late sixties and early seventies, taxpayers throughout the country rebelled. In many areas, they voted down bond issues and property tax increases for supporting schools. Expansion slowed. Colleges and universities followed a similar pattern. They too went through a cycle of explosive expansion and then cutbacks in the seventies. They too felt the sting of criticism. Critics charged that higher education had become so narrow and specialized it had lost touch with students as human beings. In June 1972, President Nixon signed into law the Education Aid Bill. It provided, for the first time, federal money that colleges and universities could use as they wished. Through scholarships, grants, and loans, the federal government would also provide financial help for college students who needed it. But in 1973 only a small amount of federal money actually reached the colleges. Immigration Laws Since 1921, the United States had followed a policy of setting quotas for immigrants on the basis of national origin. Many Americans felt that the immigration laws were racist and should be changed. Congress had occasionally passed special laws to allow particular groups into the country. For instance, after the Hungarian revolution of 1956, the United States had granted refuge to thousands of "freedom fighters." Likewise, it had aided Cubans fleeing from Castro's regime. But it had not changed the basic policy. Both Kennedy and Johnson proposed revisions. In October 1965, President Johnson signed into law far-reaching immigration and nationality bills. The new standards gave preference to close relatives of residents in the United States and to people with special talents, such as artists, professional people, and skilled workers. It set an annual quota of 170,000 on immigrants from all nations outside the Western Hemisphere. Immigration from nations of the Western Hemisphere, previously unlimited, was to be held to 120,000 annually after 1968. By 1970, more than 70 percent of the peo- I pie of the United States lived in urban areas, I in either city or suburb. In general, suburbs I had a higher proportion of upper- and mid- I dle-income Americans than did the cities, I and their residents usually sought to main- I tain this situation. Racial integration was uncommon in the I suburbs, and fear (which is not the same I thing as hatred) of blacks was a common I reason that whites moved to the suburbs. I During the sixties, about 2.5 million whites I moved to the suburbs while about 3 million I blacks moved from rural areas to cities. Cities I also gained other groups, such as Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, and Indians. Both cities and suburbs suffered from these I shifts in population. With the concentration I of low-income people in cities, some neigh- I borhoods became known for high crime I rates, slum housing, alcoholism, drug abuse, I and personal violence. Many middle-class I Americans, both white and black, came to I fee! that the cities had become "places of I terror" where people lived in constant fear. The closely packed areas of the streetcar city (fore- ground) contrast with widely spaced lots in the automobile city (background). "Urban sprawl" raised important questions about land-use policy. 