The first inhabitants of what is now the United States arrived thousands of years ago. They had emigrated from Asia across the Bering Straits. Less than five hundred years ago, these peoples lived in hundreds of tribal groups scattered across the continent. Then new peoples—Europeans—arrived to join them in occupying the land. These newcomers came to dominate the native Americans—whom they called Indians—and to occupy the entire continent. They recruited large numbers of Africans as laborers, bringing them to America as captives and keeping most of them in slavery until 1865. Millions of other European emigrants were followed by emigrants from Asia, Central America, and the Caribbean area. Where perhaps fewer than 1 million Indians lived in the late fifteenth century, more than 200 million Americans live today. Only a small proportion of these Americans claim either full or part-Indian ancestry, however. Chapter 1 examines the first contacts between Indians and Europeans. These contacts worked to oust or exterminate most of the Indians. But why was that the outcome? Why did not the two groups usually amalgamate by intermarrying? Or why did they not usually assimilate, with one group adopting the culture of the other, or each group taking on some of the other's way of life? Or why, even, did they not accommodate to each other's presence by living separate lives in separate cultures? Readings 1 through 3 examine these questions. The chapter ends with an essay summing up the era of exploration and colonization by the Europeans. 25. No Indian shall take an Englishman's canoe without permission, under the penalty of five shillings. 26. No Indian shall come into any Englishman's house unless he knocks first. And this they shall also expect from the English. 27. Whoever beats his wife shall pay twenty shillings. 28. If any Indian has a quarrel with another Indian and l>eats him, he shall pay twenty shillings. Which of the following terms best fits what was happening to Indian and English cultures in New England: amalgamation, assimilation, accommodation, or extermination? The discovery and settlement of America did not grow from a single cause. They resulted from four closely related movements. Together they triggered the expansion of Europe and filled the oceans of the world with European ships. The first of these developments was an economic revival. In the centuries following the collapse of the Roman Empire, most people in Europe lived on isolated, self-sufficient manors. Then the Italian cities began to increase their trade with the Near East and the Far East. Merchants pushed in to India and China, and Europeans began to demand their goods. A vigorous trade soon developed between the Mediterranean countries and northern Europe. Cities grew as trading and manufacturing centers. And stories of new lands, often circulated by Crusaders who fought to oust Moslems from the Holy Land, stirred interest in travel and trade. The economic revival led to voyages of discovery and colonization for a number of reasons. It stirred people's desires for products from the Far East. Hence it encouraged them to look for new routes around Africa or across the Atlantic. It displaced many people from their traditional roles in the economy. These extra workers could be turned into colonists. Industry began to develop and with it came an increased demand for raw material which colonies could satisfy. European merchants formed companies to carry on trade with the Near East, Russia, and the Far East. They developed ways to raise large sums of money to finance colonies. And they worked out methods of governing new colonies while they were being established. ► Should a government help finance enterprises that will bring huge profits to private groups or individuals? Why or why not? The Renaissance also played an important role. Beginning in the fourteenth century, people turned their attention from thoughts of religion, which dominated the lives of medieval people, to concerns of the world around them. Some people developed new maps and charts and navigational instruments essential to later voyages of discovery. They also perfected fast new ships capable of sailing in the direction from which the wind was blowing. A further development helped to prepare Europe for its American adventures. This was the growth in unity and power of each of the five nation-states which did most of the exploring and settling: Portugal, Spain, England, France, and the Netherlands. Stretched along the coast of the Atlantic, these states sought new routes to the Indies. They even provided government funds to finance voyages. A spirit of national rivalry grew up among them and spurred explorers and colonists to greater efforts. Nearly every promoter of colonies mentioned the need to strengthen his or her nation as one of the main reasons for colonization. Finally, the development of the Protestant and Catholic Reformations helped to contribute to the settlement of the Americas. Early in the sixteenth century, a movement to reform the Catholic Church began. The movement, which was led by such people as Martin Luther and John Calvin, resulted in the establishment of many Protestant churches. Religious wars and religious persecution followed. Many Europeans left their homes to escape these ills and to seek religious freedom elsewhere. Thousands of these people came to the Americas. There they settled largely in New England and the Middle Colonies. Catholic explorers and missionaries also came to the New World. They played key roles in the exploration and settlement of both Canada and South America. Settlers Come to the Americas Portugal Portugal, the most westerly of the five nations, was first to begin explorations. Its long coastline beckoned its people to the sea. For centuries foreign sailors had crowded its ports. During the fifteenth century. Prince Henry the Navigator (1391- 1460) rallied the resources of the Portuguese crown to push exploration. Prince Henry was anxious to find the legendary Christian kingdom of Prester John. It was supposedly located somewhere in the middle of the African continent. Prince Henry was also an ardent student of science. He wanted to develop new navigational instruments and to extend the boundaries of the knowledge of geography. Finally, Prince Henry was a practical businessman interested in trade. All these interests and motives helped to whet his appetite for voyages of exploration down the coast of Africa. Year after year, his sailors pushed back the boundary of the unknown seas. In 1487, Bartholomeu Dias rounded the Cape of Good Hope in search of the kingdom of Prester John. However, he was turned back by his rebellious crew. Ten years later, Vasco da Gama rounded the Cape and sailed all the way to Calcutta in India. He returned to Portugal with a rich cargo of spice and precious stones. At this time, Portugal was a tiny nation with a small population. Most of its people were farmers, fishermen, and sailors. One of its captains, Pedro Cabral, stumbled upon Brazil in 1500 when his fleet was driven westward before a storm. But Portugal lacked the resources to expand its quest for American colonies. Its influences in the New World never extended beyond Brazil. The people of this nation still speak the language of the Portuguese captains who landed on its shores. Spain The Spanish had a larger role in colonizing the Americas. Before 1450, five kingdoms, including Portugal, existed on the Iberian peninsula. In the next sixty years, however, four of the five kingdoms were united under the joint monarchy of Ferdinand of Aragon and Isabella of Castile. Together these two monarchs broke the strength of the nobles and organized a powerful central government. They took over the military organizations, a step which filled the royal coffers with money. They established Catholicism as the state religion, .hid they set up the Inquisition to see that all Jews and Moslems had either become genuine converts to Catholicism or had left the country. For more than a century thereafter, Spain was the most powerful state in Europe. Spain also dominated the Americas. Starting in 1492 with the first of the four voyages of Columbus, its soldiers and sailors explored all the Americas from Florida to Cape Horn. The Spanish subjugated the Indians and sent vast fortunes back to the homeland. But the Spanish colonies turned out to be very different from the English settlements that appeared later to the north. The motives of their settlers and the resources of the home country account for some of these differences. Like Portugal, Spain was thinly populated. Moreover, many of its best merchants and artisans were driven out of the country after 1492 because they were Jews or Moslems. But the countryside was filled with thousands of restless men. They w'ere the sons of petty nobles, without estates and with slim hopes for the future. Spain obtained its soldiers and settlers from among these men. Captains recruited them and formed them into armies. They conquered not only parts of Europe but also most of the Americas. However, the Spanish could spread only a thin population over the lands they conquered. They emigrated as conquerors in small numbers, and also women stayed at home. Along with the soldiers went a host of priests. They intended to Christianize the natives and bring them within the fold of the Catholic Church. All over the Americas, Catholic priests from Spain explored the country. They ministered to others and converted the natives. The gentry was a class at people who had wealth but no titles of nobility. But the priests came mainly as missionaries and members of religious orders who could not marry. They did not build settlements of people of European origin like those which Protestant ministers and their congregations built in English-speaking colonies farther north. France France entered the race for colonies in the seventeenth century. By mid-century it was developing into the most powerful nation in Europe. It was united under a powerful ruler, Louis XIV, and had a growing economy. The voyages to North America were sponsored by the king and by trading companies. They were undertaken to find a Northwest Passage through the Americas to the Far East. When the French discovered the wealth of the fur trade, a few adventurous people settled in Canada. They established trading posts chiefly along the banks of the St. Lawrence River. But no hosts of dispossessed people, ready and able to settle, populated France. French farmers remained secure on their lands. And artisans could find plenty of work in crafts and industries. French Protestants called Huguenots were the one group which might have formed the basis for settlements. But they were forbidden by Catholic monarchs to live in France's colonies. Hence, the French colonies, like the Spanish, were lightly settled. Moreover, the settlers were largely single men who married Indian women and made their living in the fin trade. The Netherlands The Dutch became Protestants in the sixteenth century. They fought long and costly wars against the Spanish Catholics who ruled them. Eventually, they drove out the Spanish and established a republic. Holland's small population was occupied mainly with fishing and with far-flung manufacturing and trade enterprises. A developing industry absorbed the labor supply. And there was complete religious toleration at home. As a result, few Dutch families wanted to emigrate to the New World. After Henry Hudson sailed up the Hudson River early in the seventeenth century, a few Dutch traders established posts from Manhattan Island to Albany. But only a few thousand settlers followed. In the 1660's, England and the Netherlands went to war. The Dutch colonies were conquered by the English and Dutch colonizing ended in North America. England Seventeenth-century England was in the midst of economic and social changes. These had a marked effect upon the American colonies. The manorial system had broken down as free labor and cash payments, combined with low prices for crops, produced a new agricultural system. Uprooted from the soil of their ancestors, farmers flocked to the cities. These footloose people flooded the labor market. Cast adrift in society, thousands of them looked across the wide Atlantic for opportunity. So did many of the wealthy. Some wanted grants of land to establish themselves in the New World as gentry. What does this newspaper story imply about causation? had learned to form joint-stock companies. In these, a number of investors bought shares of stock. As a result, they obtained a vote in company decisions. The New World seemed to offer a fertile ground for profit for these companies. Even the Pilgrims were financed by a joint-stock company. It expected them to produce profits through fishing, lumbering, trading for furs, and farming. In the seventeenth century, England was racked with religious dissension. As persecution of one group by another mounted, some groups decided to move to the colonies. Protestant groups like the Puritans and Pilgrims decided to settle in New England. The Catholics and the Quakers moved to the Middle Colonies. All these changes affected the people of seventeenth-century England at once. As a result, people had mixed motives for emigrating to the New World. The Puritans' main motive was to form a Bible Commonwealth. Yet they too were urged toward the New World by the economic, political, and social changes which were sweeping their homeland. The Quakers, or the Society of Friends, founded a religious group in England in the seventeenth century. Quakers believed that ministers and ritual were unnecessary in religious services. They were pacifists who would not bear arms. Although Quakers tolerated other persons' beliefs, they were persecuted in seventeenth-century England. It is a general rule that major developments in history arise from a number of complex causes rather than from a single cause or from the influence of a single person. This rule is illustrated by the entire movement leading to the discovery, exploration, and settlement of America. More than any other country in Europe, England had developed a representative government that could check the power of the king or queen. The English believed that their monarch, like anyone else, was subject to the law. English monarchs had learned to share authority with Parliament. Hereditary nobles and bishops sat in the upper chamber of Parliament, the House of Lords. Commoners from counties and towns elected their representatives, usually aristocrats, to the House of Commons. The king or queen could not tax without the consent of Parliament. They could not imprison people at their own whims. Nor could they violate legal customs established in the common law. Local government rested firmly in the hands of the influential men of the locality. The English people who emigrated to America took with them their belief in the supremacy of law, their devotion to political institutions in which they were represented, their adherence to the common law, and their assumption that the rich and powerful should influence political affairs the most. Africa As the Portuguese sailed down the coast of Africa in the mid-fifteenth century, they began to buy slaves and to send them back to Portugal. Soon all the major colonizing countries entered the slave trade. It focused mainly on the southern coast of West Africa. There the population was concentrated in the tropical rain forests and in the grasslands farther inland toward the Sahara. These people fell easy prey to the advanced technology of the Europeans. A few centuries earlier, great kingdoms had grown up in this part of Africa. Slowly, under the attacks of Arabs from the north, they decayed. Bv the fifteenth century, the kingdoms along the coast had broken up into small communities. They were unable to offer much resistance to European invaders. The Portuguese, along with other Europeans who followed, began to trade with the Africans. They exchanged goods which the Africans could not obtain for slaves who were needed to work in the New World. The men and women who were bought and shipped to America became the ancestors of today's black Americans. The American Environment Challenges the Newcomers Three features of the New World assumed important roles in the development of the colonies. The first was the physical environment and what could be grown there. Northern Canada was cold and inhospitable. It attracted only the fur traders and trappers who exploited its animals. In southern Canada and throughout New England and the Middle Colonies, winters were harsh and the land often rocky. But soil, rainfall, and growing season were suited to agriculture. Here, any hardworking farmer could make a good living. Most of the land was covered with trees. They could provide masts, lumber, pitch, and tar for sale in England. The forest-product industries encouraged shipbuilding and trade. The rich fishing and whaling waters off the coast furnished the basis for another industry. These resources provided the foundation for a diversified economy in which farming, manufacturing, and trade all played their parts. Such an economy demanded skilled workers who could turn their hands to many tasks. The southern part of what is now the United States, Central America and the islands of the Caribbean, and much of the northern half of South America were warm or hot throughout the year. Much of this area had rich soil and plentiful rainfall. These conditions encouraged the production of staple crops like sugar, tobacco, indigo, or cotton. All these crops required large numbers of laborers. But their cultivation did not demand the variety of skills essential to success in the north. Hence, the natural environment of the southern areas encouraged the use of slaves. They did not have to be trained in a variety of skills new to them. The presence of Indians was a second feature of the social environment. It played an important role in the development of the colonies. Since their emigration across the Bering Straits, the cultures of the North American Indians had changed little. Their weapons were simple. And their tribal organization allowed the whites to play one tribe off against another. They were no match for the highly organized Europeans armed with muskets. If the Indians of the north got in the way of colonists, the Europeans could either push them farther west or kill them. A third feature of the American environment is more difficult to define. In one sense, that feature was space. Land was free for the taking. A vast wilderness waited for the plow. In another sense, it was distance. Thousands of miles separated the colonists from the source of authority and from the hand of custom in Europe. Extensive lands meant that a son need not obey his father from fear of disinheritance. He could obtain land of his own. It meant too that monarchs could reward their servants with generous grants of land. Both long distances and slow communications forced colonial rulers to make decisions without consulting the home government. And colonists who grew up in the sight of the forest and never saw the homeland became more and more inclined to make their own decisions. In addition, the harsh conditions of the new land required new types of decisions about new issues. Taken together, the rich natural resources, the presence of Indians, and the stretch of free land an ocean removed from Europe played key roles in the process of Americanizing the Europeans. The technology of the North American Indians was simpler than that of the Europeans. Did this give the Europeans the right to conquer and displace the Indians? Why or why not? The Maturing Colonies, 1700-1763 In the 1700's, life for most inhabitants of the colonies grew gradually more orderly, safe, and pleasant Forests gave way to farms and plantations. The number of wild animals dwindled, and Europeans forced the Indians into the back country. Growing villages, towns, and a few cities offered townspeople and visiting farmers opportunities to trade and to see new sights and faces. The rich supply of cheap land and the demand for colonial products kept unemployment lower and pay higher than anywhere in Europe. These conditions encouraged the raising of large families and drew a steady stream of immigrants across the Atlantic. As immigrants adapted to the new environment and as the colonial population grew, the colonists became less European and more American. During the first half of the eighteenth century, the roots of American culture took firm hold in colonial soil. It is difficult to examine the beginnings of American culture since few statistics are available for the period and relatively few firsthand records have survived, particularly from the lower classes. It is possible, however, to learn something about eighteenth-century society from the writings of its leaders. In any society, influential leaders are part of an elite—a small group holding a large amount of power. But they often represent the values and aspirations of the men and women who follow them. For this reason, knowledge of the lives of the elite may also provide information about the rest of the society. Chapter 3 examines the history of the American colonies during the first half of the eighteenth century. The first three readings show life as seen by a Virginia planter, a Boston minister, and a Philadelphia printer. The readings focus upon the similarities and differences of these three colonial leaders. The essay which completes the chapter describes the development of the colonies during these important years. By eighteenth-century standards British America was a I flourishing place. Its relatively flee religious atmosphere and its I abundant economic opportunities attracted thousands of immigrants. I Its growing commerce created fortunes for merchants in both America I and Britain and helped to raise the standard of living of hundreds I of thousands of other persons. Its governments, which had a great I deal of local control, generally had the support of the people. Its I physical security became assured in 1763 when France lost virtually I all its possessions in America. Thus, except for native Americans and I black slaves, the British colonies deserved the reputation of a land I of opportunity. ► Has your family ever moved? Why did they move? Were the reasons similar to those of the colonial settlers? The Colonists Multiply The rate of population growth is a good measure of the favorable conditions found in British America in the 1700's. At this time, the rate of growth was the fastest in the world. The colonists doubled in number every twenty-five years. A person who lived from 1700 to 1763 saw the population of the mainland colonies grow from about 250,(XX) to almost 1,600,000, as the graph on page 69 indicates. Much of this increase resulted from longer lives and more births, but much also came from the stream of immigrants. The newcomers came from several areas. Hundreds of thousands of Scottish Presbyterians who had settled in northern Ireland now- left the depressed economy of that region. Many thousands of Irish Catholics joined them. Since these settlers were usually poor, many came as indentured servants. Others moved quickly to the back country where land was cheap. Between one and two hundred thousand Germans abandoned Europe for the British colonies. They had become dissatisfied with hard economic conditions and persecutions of religious minorities. Many came as indentured servants, but some came in organized communities. They settled in large numbers in Pennsylvania, with its tolerant religious policies and vast reserves of land suited for farming. The Africans who came to America constituted the largest non-En- glish group in the colonies. During the 1700's, the slave trade, now open to all English or colonial merchants, reached new heights. By 1776 blacks in the mainland colonies numbered half a million, one fifth of the population. More than nine tenths of the black population lived in the plantation colonies south of Pennsylvania. Blacks outnumbered whites in South Carolina and Virginia. The newer immigrants introduced greater diversity into the colonial population than had existed before. Many German groups remained apart, speaking their own language. Blacks, even when freed, were kept in an inferior position either by law or by custom. The immigration of the 1700's produced a population of which a large minori- tv—perhaps a third—was non-British. Town, Farm, Plantation, and City In 1750 more than 90 percent of the colonists made their living directly from the land by raising crops and animals, or by taking timber and other products from the forests. Yet their patterns of life—the ways they spent their hours at work, at worship, in politics, and at leisure—differed considerably from region to region. New England's hilly, rocky, and sandy lands discouraged the creation of large plantations. Small farms were the rule. At first the landholders of a New England town—the unit of local govern- ment-settled close together in villages, surrounded by their fields, pastures, and w oodland. Community life centered on the meetinghouse where both religious services and civic affairs took place. Usually a tavern or inn also became a social center. As time went on, settlers who received grants of land in outlying towns often sold it to newcomers or divided it among their children. Farmhouses began to be scattered farther away from the villages. ► What difference does it make if people learn to think of themselves as part of nature rather than as outside of nature and superior to it? People must become co-workers with nature to repair the da that has been done. To reclaim wasteland, people must work nature to overcome the damage caused by misuse of the land. Fort should be replanted. By absorbing the excess water, these trees t protect the land from floods. Rivers and streams will then return> their natural levels. How are the ideas of Thoreau and Marsh related to the developmaj you read about in Readings 40 and 41? Population Growth and Mobility American In; Populatioi limited natu vast resourc-' people worl domestic m; During tl with a stee included th those 1 iste< imported t secretly to the Unitec technology made a trt sioners ae of manu fa As the American people approached the disaster of secession! and Civil War, they lived in the world's most prosperous and rapidly! growing nation. This essay discusses economic, cultural, and territorial! growth in that nation from about 1840 to I860. The annual value of manufactures in America practically doubled I between 18.50 and 1860. Industry, however, had been growing steadily! throughout the century. After the War of 1812, the total annual value! of manufactured goods produced in America had been less than $2001 million. By 1859, the northeastern states alone produced goods wortli more than $1 billion. I figure Inven Eli V The rapid increase of factory production w as related to the growth I and mobility of the American population. From 1800 to 18.50, Ameri-I can population increased more than 30 percent every ten years. Large numbers of this increasing population moved from east to west and! from country to city. The arrival of great numbers of European immigrants swelled the I population figures and added to the movement of people within the I country. During the 1830's, only about .500,000 immigrants came to this country. During the 1840's, this number tripled to over 1,500,000. And during the 1850's, it climbed to about 2,500,000. Most of the immigrants came from Ireland and from Germany. The majority of the Irish settled in cities on the eastern seaboard where most of them worked as factory hands or as day laborers. Many of the Germans moved to the Midwest where they became farmers or merchants. Robe Fete Cyrr Cha Sans Elia Rid Wil Wi Eli Ed Am indust this te know histoi that 1 need othei beca traditional ways of doing things. Some believed that American education explained the efficiency and cleverness of the American worker. Whatever the explanation, Europeans considered American tools far | superior to their own. Many artisans emigrating to America left their tools at home. The growth of a national railroad system was the most spectacular I aspect of the American industrial revolution before the Civil War. Railroads expanded the market for agricultural and manufactured products. They also increased the value of property. The railroads represented the largest industrial investment in the country before the Civil War. By 1860, private investors in America and Europe. 1 and federal, state, and local governments invested over a billion dollars in railroads. The federal government also aided railroad construction by granting federal land along the right-of-way to the railroad companies. The construction and maintenance of the railroads helped to spur the growth of the iron and steel industry and, in turn, to support the entire industrial enterprise. ► Would you rather work at a leisurely pace for twelve hours or at a very rapid pace for eight? Why? Industrialization Creates a Working Class The growth, mobility, attitudes, and education of the American people influenced the development of industry. The city and factors also made great changes in people's lives. Most of the unskilled laborers and factory workers came from unsuccessful farms or were European immigrants. The immigrants, especially the Irish, did most of the heavy construction work in building canals, railroads, and factories. They lived in crude shanties on the fringes of construction projects or in the worst parts of the cities. For skilled workers, two systems of labor were used in most factories. One, practiced in the textile mills of Lowell and Waltham, Massachusetts, employed young farm girls. The girls lived in supervised boardinghouses. They usually worked for a few years, saved their money, and then returned to their homes to get married. The second labor system employed whole families—father, mother, and young chil- dren—to tend the looms. Today, w'orking conditions before the Civil War seem hard and w ages low. Men, women, and children worked tw elve to fifteen hours a day. Skilled workers earned four to ten dollars a week. Unskilled workers, including many women and children, earned one to six dollars a week. Yet working conditions and wages in America were better than in Europe. Industrialization, nevertheless, changed American society. A distinct working class developed during the period. Class lines remained flexible. But the unpropertied industrial worker and city dweller became a normal part of American society. The New Immigrants tween 1815 and 1 920, roughly 35 million men, women, and ren migrated from Europe, Asia, Canada, and Mexico into the led States. This enormous movement of people was part of an ^national process of development. It went beyond the history ny single nation. It was the human counterpart of the movement Ijapital and goods across oceans and continents. 'any of these migrants ultimately returned to their places of jin. In 1908, for example, nearly 750,000 people left the United "tes. For them, their stay in the United States was an episode a family history. Its long-term effects were felt mainly in their ye lands. 'ost of the migrants stayed, however. There are two ways of ing at their history. In most textbooks, the process of migration even into the history of the nation. Immigrants had problems made contributions to the nation. However, immigrant groups selves often developed a different view of their histories. For , the subject was not the nation, but the people. Some Italians in Naples. Some lived in New York. Some Chinese lived in nghai. Some lived in San Francisco. Some Poles lived in Warsaw, e lived in Chicago. But the subject of the history was always continuous people—Italians, Chinese, Poles, and others, his chapter examines the experiences of those immigrants who stothe United States between 1 880 and 1 920. The documents you to switch back and forth between two perspectives—the onal perspective and the perspective of the migrant people. In pter 1, you discussed the interaction between groups as proof extermination, accommodation, assimilation, or amalga- n. Try looking at these processes first from one perspective then from the other. Does the value you attach to each process from one perspective to another? 1882 Congress passes Chinese Exclusion Act 1885 Organized labor presses for restriction of immigration of foreign workers 1889 Jane Addams founds Hull House 1890 Jacob Riis publishes How the Other Half Lives 1897 Jane Addams addresses National Education Association 1904 Theodore Roosevelt is elected President 1907 Gentleman's Agreement limits number of Japanese entering United States 1910 Emily Batch publishes Our Slavic Fellow Citizens 1912 Woodrow Wilson is elected President 1917 United States enters World War I 1917 Congress imposes literacy test as basis for entry into United States 1921 First quota law restricting immigration goes into effect 1924 National Origins Act imposes a more restrictive quota 1965 Immigration Act eliminates national origins system Almost every immigrant group has gone through a protea of asserting its tme Americanism. In doing this, most have discovered a record of colonial settlers or revolutionary heroes. However, the first discovery made by the wave of nineteenth-century immigrant! was very different. Opportunity and offers of jobs had encouraged many to emigrate. They were able to find work quickly at construction sites, on docks and farms, and in factories or mills. Nevertheless, most soon discovered that moving and becoming accepted in a new land could be very painful. The pain was greatest for those who seemed most different from native Americans. These included Orientals, and Europeans of the Catholic, Jewish, Greek Orthodox and Russian Orthodox faiths. Native Americans had difficulty understanding the* people. And many had little sympathy for them. As a result, thev tended to think of them in stereotyped and threatening terms. One nationality group had a hot temper, another was dull, another eraftv. and so on. Those Americans wTho reached out to the immigrants found that such stereotypes did not fit the people they came to know. Thev did not find a group of ignorant people bent on undermining American society. Instead, they discovered people wrestling with a series i deep dilemmas. What was America? Should they grasp it? Mould be allowed to grasp it? To how much of the old should they lading 60 is drawn from the work of Emily Green Balch, one 6 most expert and sympathetic American observers of immigrants, on read, keep the following questions in mind: bw did the immigrants described by Emily Balch respond to jaerica? bw did their children influence their responses? What Are Americans? Emily Balch taught economics at Wellesley College in Khusetts at the time she wrote Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. To I data for her hook, she traveled extensively in Austria-Hungary, m of Europe from which most Slavs emigrated. In this excerpt iscribes the immigrants' experiences in America. iy people do not live in America. They live underneath America, rica goes over their heads. America does not begin till a man rorkingman, till he is earning two dollars a day. A laborer cannot d to be an American." lese words were said to me by one of the wisest Slav leaders I have ever met. They have rung in my mind during all the 'ears since he spoke them. Beginning at the bottom, "living not nerica but underneath America," means living among the worst wildings that the country has to show. They are often worse than lublic would tolerate, except that "only foreigners" are affected, imingto America they are cut off from the life of their old country, hey cannot get into contact with the true life of their new home, fare shut off by language, by mutual prejudice, and by different i. To them, both parents are dead, the fatherland that begot them the foster-mother that supports without cherishing them. Joes the individual emigrant gain?" In the first place, emigration ys involves pain. It involves pain to those who go, and, above lain to those who are left behind. Immigrants are inevitably to | extent exiles. They are separated from the old familiar scenes thich everyone sometimes yearns. And they are divided, even e more immediate family has all been brought together, from I of those near and dear to them. person must experience what it means to be in a country where lannot speak the language in order to understand it. People must change their ways of expression. It seems as useless to gesture nile as to speak. It is almost as if one could not even think, so asiveand numbing is the sense that the channels of communication 'locked. Emily Balch, Our Slavic Fellow Citizens. Language simplified. If you were suddenly taken to a strange land where no natives knew your customs or spoke your language, how much would you miss life in the place you had left? In addition to church-related societies, immigrants organized a wide variety of associations. These included loan societies, cooperative stores, patriotic organizations associated with political activities in their native countries, educational and cultural societies, and insurance organizations. A foundry is a plant where molten metal is cast or shaped in molds. I get the impression that the women are more apt to be homesick I than the men. As a matter of fact, I think that the women both lose I more and gain less by the change than the men. They do not like the iron stoves, which do not bake such sweet bread as their old ovens. 1 They miss, I think, the variety of work, employment within doml alternating with field work. Most of all they miss the familiar, sociable village life where everyone know s everyone else. And there are no superior Yankees to embarrass one. There the children do not grow ; up to be alien and contemptuous. The men live more out in the world. They get more from America and perhaps had less to lose in the old conditions. Immigrants are often treated undemocratically in America. And this treatment sometimes makes one's blood boil. But they do get in America a sense of being regarded as equals that is new' and dear to them. To the men it often means expansion. One of the most surprising facts in the life of Slavs in America is the degree to which they are organized into societies. Mans of their associations are small local groups of the most various sorts In a New York Bohemian paper 1 found a list of 95 local societies among this group of perhaps 35,000 people. Each of the main Slavic nationalities in the United States has one or more national societies. All are apparently organized on much the same plan. They have a central coordinating committee and numerous branches. The branches are founded primarily to provide mutual insurance, but they also serve many other purposes. The membership of these societies includes people of the same national or national- religious groups. These scattered groups of poor and ignorant immigrants are totally unused to organization. And they are foreign to all ideas of parliamentary procedure. These societies must draw' a large part of their membership from such people. Yet it is remarkable how rapidly thev have grown and how highly developed and successful they are. When people are scattered in a strange country, the "consciousness of kind" with fellow countrymen has a very special significance. To many an immigrant the idea of nationality first becomes real after he has left his native country. At home the contrast was between peasants as a class and landlords as a class. In America he finds a vast world of people. All speak strange tongues. For the first time he has a vivid sense of oneness with those who speak his own language, whether here or at home. But it is not only common speech and ways, and in some cases common political aims that draw the different groups of immigrants together. The sense of economic weakness also draws them. The dangerous character of the work in the mines and foundries which employ so many Slavs helps them to appreciate the advantages of mutual aid. [Oosely connected with the societies are the newspapers. They also ye attained a surprising development here. Among the Slovaks, and ips among some other nationalities, the circulation of papers in own language is greater in America than it is at home. The recent Slavic immigrants, Poles and others, have formed 'derable colonies. Their hearts are set, with a strength of desire we can hardly conceive, on having their children speak their ® language as their proper tongue. I have heard of graduates of Polish schools in Chicago and Baltimore who do not understand ish. I have seen a Polish "sister's" school w here the children were g Polish songs: "We are little exiles; Far from our dear home We weep night and dav," nething like that, the little round-cheeked boys just in from play a Chicago sidew alk w ere chanting. A thousand more items to show the separateness of the foreign i in our midst might be piled together. In the end they would lie as nothing against the irresistible influence through which it res about that the immigrants find themselves the parents of irican children. They are surprised. They are proud. They are lized. They are stricken to the heart with regret. Whatever jr emotions, they are powerless. The prestige of America and the hatred of children for being 'rent from their playmates is something the parents cannot stand -st. When they learn English, the children are apt to lose their parents' ge. Against this the parents strive. It is very common, for nee. for the parents to try to have the children speak only the language until they go to school. They foresee that after the dren have entered school, they will speak English not only outside |lf the home but within it, too. They see that it w ill be impossible keep English from becoming the family language. From then on, t parents must talk w ith their own children in a foreign tongue which they are consciously at a disadvantage. One of the great evils among the children of foreigners is the trous gulf between the older and the younger generation. Disci- e, in this new freedom which both parents and children misunder- d, is almost impossible. The children have to act as interpreters their parents and do business for them. So they are throw'n into position of unnatural importance. They feel only contempt for world ways, a feeling encouraged by the common American tude. One hears stories of Italian children refusing to reply to their her if spoken to in Italian. ► How would you feel about your parents If you knew more about living in your society than they did? Why might you feel that way? What personal qualities do you think should be encouraged in students? Some states had passed laws regulating child labor. In 1916. Congress passed the Keating-Owen Act. It forbade interstate shipping of products from factories employing children under 14 or from mines employing children under 16. The Supreme Court declared the law unconstitutional. The effect of immigration upon the women is that of idleness. All of those outdoor and domestic activities, which she would naturally I have handed on to her daughters, have slipped away from her. The domestic arts are gone, with all their absorbing interests for the children, their educational value, and incentive to activity. The child of these families has little or no opportunity to use his energies in domestic work, or, indeed, constructively, in any direction No activity is supplied to take the place of that which, in Italy, he woidd naturally have found in his own home. No new contact with wholesome life is made for him. Italian parents count upon the fact that their children learn the English language and American customs before they themselves do. The children act as interpreters of the language about them. And they also act as buffers between them and Chicago. This results in a certain, almost pathetic dependence of the family upon the child. When a member of the family, therefore, first goes to school, the event is filled with much significance to all the others. Let us take one of these boys. Whatever interest has come to the minds of his ancestors has come through the use of their hands in the open air. Yet the first thing that the boy must do when he reaches school is to sit still, at least part of the time. And he must learn to listen to what is said to him, with all the perplexity of listening to a foreign tongue. The child is perfectly indifferent to showing off and making a good recitation. Too often the teacher's notion of her duty is to transform the child into a somewhat smug and comfortable type of American. She insists that the boy's powers must at once be developed in an abstract direction. And she ignores the fact that his parents have had to do only with tangible things. She has little idea of the development of Italian life. She fails, therefore, not only in knowledge of, but also in respect for, the child and his parents. She quite honestly judges the child by an American standard. The contempt for the experiences and languages of their parents which foreign children sometimes show is most damaging to their moral as well as intellectual life. It is doubtless due in part to the overemphasis which the school places upon speaking and reading in English. This cutting into his family loyalty takes away one of the most valuable traits of the Italian child. In education it is necessary to begin with the experiences which the child already has through his spontaneous and social activity. The city street begins this education for him in a more natural way than does the school. Let us leave the child who does not stay in school. And let us now consider the child who does faithfully remain until he reaches the age of factory work. In the most advanced of our factory states this means fourteen years. Has anything been done up to this time to make him conscious of his social value? Has the outcome of the esses to which he has been subjected adapted him to deal more tively with his present life? Has the public school given this child l Knowledge of the social meaning of his work? He finds himself in the drudgery of a factory. He is using his hands forunknown ends, and his head not at all. During his years in school le has used his head mostly, and his hands very little. Hence, nothing wilders him so much as the suggestion that the school was intended fc a preparation for his work in life. Foreign-born children have all the drudgery of learning to listen to, and read and write an alien tongue. Many never get beyond this first drudgery. I have questioned dozens of these children who have Sett school from the third, fourth, and fifth grades. And I have met wry few who ever read for pleasure. From one point of view the school itself summarizes the competitive system of the factory. Certain standards are held up and worked for. Even in the school, the child does little work with real joy and Iptaneity. The pleasure which comes from creative effort, the thrill production, is only occasional. It is not the sustaining motive which it going. The child in school often acquires the habit of expecting i his work in certain hours, and to take his pleasure in certain lather hours. Later, in the same spirit, he earns his money by ten hours of dull factory work. And he spends it in three hours of lurid Irod unprofitable pleasure in the evening. Both in the school and the factory, his work has been dull and growing duller. And his pleasure Imust constantly grow more stimulating. Only occasionally has he had 1 the real joy of doing a thing for its own sake. Some of us are looking forward to a time when work shall not k senseless drudgery, but shall contain some self-expression of the ker. But we sometimes feel the hopelessness of adding evening 3s and social entertainments as a mere frill to a day filled with gery. We sometimes feel that we have a right to expect more i from the public schools than they now give us. fe have a curious notion. Our notion is that it is not possible he mass of mankind to have interests and experiences of themselves ich are worth anything. We transmit to the children of working pie our own view that they will not find joy or profit in their i. We practically encourage them to get out of it as soon as possible, i am quite sure that no one can possibly mistake this paper as [plea for the trade schools, or as a desire to fit the boy for any i industry. Such a specializing would indeed be stupid when our trial methods are developing and changing, almost day by day. does contend that life as seen from the standpoint of the worker, should not be emptied of all social consciousness and e. The school could make the boy infinitely more flexible and e than he is now to the materials and forces of nature which, is spite of all man's activities, are unchangeable. Addams is referring to the effects of the division of tabor. Workers found that they were making one part repeatedly, rather than an entire finished product in which they could take pride. Is it unrealistic for people to expect the work they do for a living to be enjoyable and interesting? Evening classes in subjects such as English, history, and government helped immigrants to adjust to American life. They also helped them to prepare for their naturalization tests. In order to become citizens, immigrants had to read and write English and to demonstrate a knowledge of American history and government. Trade schools train students for a skilled trade, such as carpentry or mechanics. Mary Antin, The Promised Land (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1912), pp. 244-249. Language simplified School is now isolated from life. It fails to make life of more inte and show it in its larger aspects. And this certainly tends to defat I the very purpose of education. How do you think the situation described by Jane Addams might ha affected the interaction of immigrant and native Americans? ] time Howevftl The immigrants confronted many difficult personal dilemmas. And they responded to them in a variety of ways. No was able to impose a single pattern of adaptation on its meml As a result, there is no way of describing a single and unified J Polish, Italian, or Chinese answer to the challenge of immigral The two selections in this reading describe responses to the dilei faced by immigrants. These responses are widely separated in They are also very different, on the surface, in their evaluation of the worth of America and the costs of being an American, you may find that the insights offered by both responses complei one another. The first selection is from the autobiography of Mary Antin, published in 1912. Mary Antin's father emigrated to America from native village of Polotzk in Poland. He established himself in and then sent for his wife and children after a wait of three yemj The second selection is by Michael Novak, the grandchild of Catholic immigrants. It was written in the 1970's. As you read, about these questions: ' Petti 1. What do Antin and Novak tell you about their parents' goals* methods? 2. Do Antin and Novak completely disagree in their evaluate America and the immigrant experience? The Promised Land Apart from any other qualities, Mary Antin's autol is remarkable because it was written before she was thirty. My father, in his ambition to make Americans of us, was i headlong and strenuous in his methods. To my mother, on the a of departure for the New World, he wrote boldly that pro lews in America did not spend their days in praying. And he i her to leave her wig in Polotzk, as a first step of progress. He would have no bar to our social intercourse The Pale was a section of Russian-ruled Poland to which Jews were confined by order of the Russian government. In traditional Jewish communities, married women covered their hair with a wig as an act of modesty. Men. following rabbinic interpretation of a biblical statement, did not cut their forelocks with a razor. Suppose you were married and both you and your mate were looking for work. If you were each offered jobs in different towns, how would you decide which to take? Why? Jewish dietary laws forbid the consumption of certain foods and the mixing of milk and meat dishes Even approved foods may not be eaten if they have been prepared or served in utensils which have been used in prohibited ways. Jews who observe these rules find it difficult to eat freely at the homes of even close Gentile friends. Michael Novak. The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics: Politics and Culture in the Seventies. Used by permission. with the world around us. For only by freely sharing the life of our neighbors could we come into our full inheritance of American freedom I and opportunity. On the holy days he bought my mother a ticket I for the synagogue. But the children he sent to school. On Sabbath I eve my mother might light the consecrated candles. But he kept the I store open until Sunday morning. My mother might believe and ] worship as she pleased, up to the point where her orthodoxy began to interfere with the American progress of the family. The price that all of us paid for this disorganization of our family I life has been levied on every immigrant Jewish household where the first generation clings to the traditions of the Old World, while the second generation leads the life of the New. That part of my life which contains the climax of my personal drama I must leave to my grandchildren to record. My father might speak and tell how, in time, he discovered that in his first violent rejection of everything old and established he cast from him much I that he afterwards missed. He might tell to what extent he later ! retraced his steps, seeking to recover what he had learned to value anew. He might tell how it fared with his avowed irreligion when put to the extreme test. He might say to what, in short, his emancipation amounted. And he, like myself, would speak for thousands. My grandchildren, for all I know, may have a graver task than I have set them. Perhaps they may have to testify that the faith of Israel is a heritage that no heir in the direct line has the power to take away from his successors. Even 1, with my limited perspective, think it doubtful if the conversion of the Jew to any alien belief or disbelief is ever thoroughly accomplished. W hat positive affirmation of the persistence of Judaism in the blood my descendants may have to make. I may not be present to hear. It would be superfluous to state that none of these hints and prophecies troubled me at the time. I considered myself absolutely, eternally, delightfully emancipated from the yoke of indefensible superstitions. Unmeltable Ethnics Michael Novak's The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics expresses many of the values that emerged from a recent movement to reassert pride in one's ethnic background. This movement rejected the idea that group differences should or could be lost in a single American cultural melting pot. All four of my grandparents, unknown to one another, arrived in America from the same country in Slovakia. My grandfather had a small farm in Pennsylvania. His wife died in a wagon accident. while, Johanna, fifteen, arrived on Ellis Island, dizzy from ssing births and deaths and illness aboard the crowded ship. She i a sign around her neck lettered Passaic. There an aunt told her man who had lost his wife in Pennsylvania. She went. They were led. She inherited his three children. ch year for five years Grandma had a child of her own. She among the lucky. Only one died. When she w as twenty-two and mother of seven . . . her husband died. "Grandma Novak," as me to know her many years later, resumed the work she had D in Slovakia at the town home of a man known to my father f as "the Professor." She housecleaned and she laundered, lieard this story only weeks ago. Strange that I had not asked ently before. Odd that I should have such shallow' knowledge V roots. Amazing to me that I do not know w hat my family red, endured, learned, and hoped these last six or seven genera- It is as if there were no project in which we all have been "d, as if history in some way began with my father and with ! estrangement I have come to feel derives not only from lack ily history. Early in life, I was made to feel a slight uneasiness 1 said my name. . . When 1 was very young, the "American" kids still made ' ing out of names unlike their own. And their earnest, ambitious ,rs thought long thoughts when I introduced myself. 'er challenge in grammar school concerning my nationality, I leen instructed by my father to announce proudly: "American." ln my family moved from the Slovak ghetto to Johnstown to the f suburb on the hill, my mother impressed upon us how well W be dressed, and show good manners, and behave. People ; of us as "different" and we mustn't give them any cause, "ever you do, marry a Slovak girl," was other advice to a similar 'ey cook. They clean. They take good care of you. For your od." 1 was taught to be proud of being Slovak, but to recognize hers wouldn't know w'hat it meant, or care. . . . 'here in my schooling do 1 recall any attempt to put me in with my own history. The strategy was clearly to make an Wi of me. English literature, American literature, and even j"ry books, as I recall them, were peopled mainly by Anglo- from Boston (w'here most historians seemed to live). Not even in Pennsylvania, let alone my Slovak forebears counted for ay paragraphs. ... I don't remember feeling envy or regret: , perhaps, of unimportance, of remoteness, of not having heft to count. fact that 1 was born a Catholic also complicated life. W hat tholic but what everybody else is in reaction against?. . . . Ellis Island was the immigrant reception center in the port of New York. How much have you questioned your parents and grandparents about their youth? Should you have inquired more? The acronym WASP is used to refer to white Anglo-Saxon Protestant Americans whose ancestors emigrated from western Europe. It is hard to grow up Catholic in America without becoming defensive, perhaps a little paranoid, feeling forced to divide the world between "us" and "them." The Price Of Being Americanized My grandparents, I am sure, never guessed what it would cost them and their children to become "Americanized." In their eyes, no doubt, almost everything was gain. From the oppression experienced by Slovaks at the hands of the Austro-Hungari- an empire, the gain was liberty; from relative poverty, opportunity; from an old world, new' hope. . . . They were injured, to be sure, by nativist American prejudices against foreigners, by a white Anglo-Saxon Protestant culture, and even by an Irish church. . . . What price is exacted by America when ... it sucks [in] other cultures of the world and processes them? What do people have to lose before they can qualify as true Americans? For one thing, a lot of blue stars—and silver and gold ones—must hang in the window. You proved you loved America by dying for it in its wars. . . . One is also expected to give up one's native language. My parents decided never to teach us Slovak. They hoped that thereby we would gain a generation in the process of becoming full Americans. They kept up a few' traditions: Christmas Eve holy bread, candlelight, mushroom soup, fish, and poppyseed. My mother baked kolackv. Pirohi, however, more or less died w ith my grandmother, who used to work all day making huge, steaming pots of potato dumplings and prune dumplings for her grandchildren. No other foods shall ever taste so sweet. . . . What has happened to my people since they came to this land nearly a century ago? Where are they now, that long-aw aited fully Americanized third generation? Are we living the dream our grandparents dreamed when on creaking decks they stood silent, afraid, hopeful at the sight of the Statue of Liberty? Will we ever find that secret relief, that door, that hidden entrance? Did our grandparents choose for us, and our posterity, what they should have chosen? Now the dice lie cold in our own uncertain hands. How do Antin and Novak modify Emily Raich's description of the process of Americanization? Ethnic background remains one of the most powerful factors lerican life. It continues to influence the daily lives of many cans—whom they marry, vote for, invite to dinner, or worship The day when all Americans will amalgamate into one indistin- ible people has not yet come to pass. In the last half of the tieth century, most Americans still identify themselves by their I origins. And many first and second generation Americans me to retire to the cities, towns, and villages of their ancestors, easons why ethnic background continues to have such a strong on American life can be found in the history of the immigrants have flocked to the United States from every nation. riean Population Growth ore the Civil War, the population of the United States grew ly. Each year 103 Americans lived where only 100 had been re months before. Every twenty-five years the population doubled, high growth rate is understandable. Since food was plentiful, leans survived childhood better and lived a little longer than people in other parts of the world. Also, during that period, fnited States was primarily an agricultural nation. Large families :d farmers wrestle with a shortage of labor. So, the birth rate ined high. ter 18.50, however, the birth rate began to fall. By that time, Inited States was well on its way to becoming an industrialized, lized country. Larger families became a burden rather than a particularly in cities. Farm children were easy to house. And id a lot of work around the farm. But in the city, children ded small apartments. Moreover, they strained their parents' er income. They were seldom able to find useful work. And aring them for life in an urban industrial society required years pensive education. So, many parents decided to limit their ies. The decline in the birth rate may also have been one result B movement to improve the status of American women, begun e mid-nineteenth century. A great deal of research suggests that size of families generally falls when women have more control over their own lives. le decline in the birth rate contributed to a slow but dramatic ge in the age level of the American people. In 1800, the median of Americans was about sixteen years. It rose steadily for the A median is a number exactly in the middle. In this case, it means that there were just as many people under the age of 16 as there were people over the age of 16 in the United States in 1800. next century and a half. By 1950, the median age had passed thirty, almost double the 18(H) figure. During most of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, this rise in the median age resulted in a decrease in the "dependency ratio" in the population. In other words, more Americans than ever before were old enough to work. Fewer and fewer had to depend on parents or other adults for support. A greater supply of workers improved the productivity of the whole population It decreased the labor shortage, too. But it did not do this fast enough to make up for the decline in the birth rate and the increased demand j for workers in industry. As a result, the nation depended more and more on immigration to fill in the gap. A major change in the social and economic structure of Europe played the most important role. European agriculture and industry were being transformed. Farms were subdivided among several sons. And they eventually became too small to support a family. Furthermore, European farmers were being forced to compete with American grain and livestock. Millions could not do this. So, many farm families moved to nearbv cities. Or, they risked a new life abroad. At the same time, village artisans were being forced to compete with machine-made ] products. They, too, eventually gave up the struggle and left their homes. They sought better opportunities either in European factories or in the industries of the New World. People were also encouraged to emigrate by relatives and friends who had already braved die Atlantic crossing and established themselves in the United States, In addition, improvements in land and ocean transportation reduced the time and hardships of the long voyage. Occasionally, immigration Was triggered by such factors as religious persecution or the desire to escape military service. Finally, conditions within the United States helped stimulate immigration. During the mid-nineteenth century, the construction of railroads from northeastern cities to the Middle West opened large areas of the nation to development. Many companies had received land grants to stimulate expansion into unsettled areas. And, conse- I quently, they set up immigration agencies to advertise the potential I of these lands. Often, companies discounted all or part of the expense of transportation from the cost of land purchased by the immigrants. And through tickets and group rates were provided from remote parts of Europe to newly settled sections of the country. Several of the states also set up agencies to promote rapid settlement. Certainly, the information available in Europe about opportunities in the New World encouraged many immigrants to move directly from their original homes to newly opened regions of the United States. Through the 1860's, these factors attracted immigrants mostly from I England, Germany, Ireland, and Scandinavia. Between 1850 and 1859; around 2,750,000 immigrants arrived in the United States. Immigrate ed down during the Civil W ar. But the pace increased rapidly the late 1860's. It reached a new peak in 1873 when more than 1,000 people arrived in one year. The pace slackened again in the 1870's when the United States suffered economic problems, iwever, immigration reached an unprecedented volume in the 1880's than 5.3 million newcomers entered the United States, rilv from southern and eastern Europe. The 1900 census revealed a third of the nation was either foreign born or the children foreign born. The largest wave of immigration came between and 1924. In 1907, the peak year of this wave, 1.3 million ligrants entered the country. Figures 62A and 62B present the of immigration statistically from 1861 to 1930. 1 figure is higher because good records are not available for 1892 and 1893. i figure is higher because no figures are available from 1886-1893. The Chinese Exclusion Act also denied American citizenship to people born in China Chinese students and other specific groups were, however, allowed to enter the United States A total of 129.797 Japanese arrived in the United States between 1901 and 1910. In 1906. the San Francisco School Board declared that Oriental students must attend segregated public schools. President Theodore Roosevelt persuaded the board to cancel this order. In a series of notes he reached a "gentleman's agreement" with the Japanese government to stop the emigration of Japanese laborers to the United States. Ernest Rubin. Immigration and Economic Growth of the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth. September 4-5. 1957. National Bureau of Economic Research, p 8. as cited in American Economic History. Seymour E. Harris, ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company. Inc.. 1961). p 269 Between 1854 and 1883, substantial numbers of Chinese came to the United States. They sought better economic opportunities. In 18hi almost 40,000 Chinese entered the country. Many took jobs building railroads in the West. In 1882, Congress barred further imnugran of Chinese for ten years. This prohibition was renewed every ten vean until the close of World War II. After 1883, Japanese began to emigrate in larger numbers. In order to prohibit Japanese immigration, the United States government persuaded the government of Japan to prohibit the emigration of laborers to the United States. The measures taken against the Chinese and the Japanese had been promoted by western states, particularly by labor imions in the West. They feared competition from Oriental workers and claimed that the Chinese and Japanese were an alien race in a land peopled mainly by Caucasians. After 1900, both Canadians and Mexicans began to arrive in the United States in large numbers. In the decade after 1910, about 1 million English-speaking and 500,000 French-speaking Canadians crossed the border.- However, this population traffic went both wavs. Between 1890 and 1914, almost a million Americans emigrated to Canada. They moved primarily into the provinces bordering the states from Minnesota to Montana. In addition, the census revealed that in 1930, about 750,000 Mexicans lived in the United States. They were concentrated in Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California where they worked primarily as farm laborers. The Characteristics of the Immigrants At the time of entry, officials asked each immigrant to state his or her occupation. Figure 62C was compiled from immigrants' answers. Decade Agriculture Skilled labor Unskilled labor Domestic service the changes in immigrants described Jmily Balch seem to have been almost universal. The experience igration weakened attachments to the villages and towns in which 'grants had been born. It also increased identification with the Wl state. Groups whose life had focused around the family loped a wide range of community organizations. A vigorous press up among people who had hardly seen a newspaper before, every group, children confronted parents with conflict between and new cultures. This experience was not exactly the same for every immigrant group, teach, it involved slightly different opportunities, choices, and ilties. The eastern Europeans, for example, included approxi- jelv lVa million Jews. Jews had been forbidden by law to own in eastern Europe. And they had not been permitted to participate yin society. They lived differently from eastern European peasants, t of them earned their livings as artisans or merchants. They w ere omed to being treated as aliens in a strange and often hostile . Jews valued know ledge and achievement as measures of individ- worth. In addition, their own traditional culture had been changing several centuries. Young Jews had become excited by ideas of ghtenment" and nationalism. Released from the constraints of • native villages when they emigrated to Vienna or New York, it moved rapidly into the mainstream of modem life. On the American side of the Atlantic, Jews quickly developed strong mmity institutions. They gave them mutual protection and helped accommodate to American society. They achieved unusual nal successes. By the first decade of the twentieth century, Ten of Jew ish immigrants who entered the United States in 1890 protesting against discrimination in college admission proce- This personal success had a twofold effect upon the institutions kch first-generation immigrants had set up. On the one hand, men and women provided a large fund of capital and of ;ed personnel for community purposes. On the other hand, success American standards challenged, more rapidly than in other groups, ladequacy of group identification and pride as a way of participating American life. Jews have, at one and the same time, spoken Tously for "cultural pluralism"—the idea that there are many rican cultures, each to be represented—and for full assimilation jo America. Jews have not been entirely unique. The Oriental communities of west coast showed many of the same traits of enterprise and basis upon achievement and intellectual accomplishment. Both ' ntals and Jews met greater discrimination as they became more ful by American standards. For example, California tried to measure your worth or that of another individual? Enlightenment refers to a belief in progress, natural law and natural rights, and reason Young enlightened people scorned tradition and believed that each generation would, by its efforts, contribute a better life for the next generation. The eighteenth century is often called the Age of Enlightenment. A Magyar is a person who speaks the main language of what is now Hungary The Know-Nothing, or American, party began as a secret organization opposed to immigrants, particularly Catholics. With the disintegration of the established parties, the Know-Nothings won substantial victories in 1854 and elected several governors, state legislators, and representatives to Congress. restrict Japanese land ownership at a time (1913) when Japanesl immigrants threatened to take over large stretches of land, such as in the San Joaquin Valley. And, like Jews, Orientals have contributed I a disproportionately large number of intellectuals and profession^ I people to the society. The differences which developed among immigrant groups between the early twentieth century and today did not grow exclusively from the values which immigrants brought with them to this countn. Differences also stemmed from the American experience. Each group tended to cluster in a special set of industries or occupations. The initial concentration was in part accidental. It depended upon the most active employers at the time when a particular immigrant group first entered the country. Later, clustering was not so accidental. The j first entrants, with the support of their employers, encouraged their friends and relatives to move to the firm or industry with which they were familiar. Several of these industries, particularly in individual cities, were dominated by single groups such as Irish in construction,] Jews in clothing manufacturing, and Slavs and Magyars in steel. Immigration Restriction The era of mass immigration closed during the 1920's. Since the first onset of heavy Irish immigration in the 1840's, "native" Americans had responded ambiguously to the newcomers. Some welcomed them. Others feared for American values and greeted the newcomers with hostility. In the 1840's and 1850's this hostility, combined with anti-Catholicism, was probably the most important political issue through most of the northeastern United States. Anti-Catholic riots broke out in most major cities. And the Know-Nothing Party became a major political force. If there had been a public opinion poll at the time, the number one issue on people's minds would probably have been "nativism" rather than slavery. Nativism did not die after the Civil War. But for a time, other issues seemed more important. In the 1880's and 1890's, however, three events helped it gain strength. The first was the increase in the proportion of eastern and southern European immigrants. Native-born Americans—whose ancestors came from northern and western Europe—claimed that the newcomers came from less desirable backgrounds. Second, the old immigrants were beginning to take part in American political life. Several eastern cities elected their first mayors of Irish descent. Germans insisted that public schools should teadi German and that beer gardens should be allowed to remain open on Sunday. Many older groups resented the new power of recent immigrants. Third, the increasing economic growth and urbanization of the country threatened the self-images and traditions of mam lie, The immigrants, so much a part of the new age, became egoats for the problems they created. lisrenewed nativism showed its first important fruits in the 1890's, il communities throughout the country redoubled their efforts to make everyone more patriotic. They passed laws insisting upon English le only language of instruction in the schools. Such laws also ibited some of the "immoral" practices associated with immi- ts, especially in matters such as gambling and liquor sales that icted with religious attitudes of native groups, iativists also led a movement to restrict immigration. During the Ie quarters of the nineteenth century, states that were the :ntry for a large number of immigrants had attempted through e power to keep out diseased persons, paupers, and criminals. Congress excluded convicts, idiots, and persons likely to public charges. It also imposed a head tax of fifty cents on tiigrant admitted. In a series of later acts. Congress excluded tl groups, increased the head tax, and forbade contract labor, ts were based on the principle that the government should e types of persons to be admitted. They did not noticeably the total flow of immigrants. A demand for stricter selection estricting the total to be admitted built up steadily, particu- jng union members. providing for a literacy test in any language as a basis of a passed one house of Congress thirty-two times and on four passed both houses, only to be vetoed by the President, however, the bill passed over President Wilson's veto. This estrictive because a large proportion of the immigrants from and eastern Europe could not read. Fearing a flood of ats in the years following World War I despite the literacy gress passed another restrictive law in 1921. This law limited nmigration to 357,802 and set a quota for each nation. The as arrived at by taking 3 percent of the total number of )f that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. The voted northern and western Europe. 54, the law was toughened. It provided that after 1927 total tion in any one year would be limited to 150,000. To make total, a quota was allocated to each country according to lortion of its natives in the population of the United States The quota allocated to each group had no relationship to her of people who actually wanted to come to the United rhe quota for England, which was very large, was unused s quotas for eastern and southern European nations were small arison to the number who wanted to emigrate. This quota mplied that the newer immigrants were less desirable than northern and western Europe. Should a national government have the right to prohibit entry of immigrants with physical or mental disabilities? Why or why not? In 1864, Congress had passed a Contract Labor Law which allowed employers to recruit laborers from Europe. Workers signed contracts agreeing to work for one employer for a specified period of time for specified wages. Workers could not legally leave the job during the contract term. American laborers objected to the law. and Congress repealed it in 1885. The "Literacy Test Act" required aliens over 16 to read "not less than 30 nor more than 80 words in ordinary use" in English or some other language. Since 1968. the United States admits 120.000 immigrants from the Western Hemisphere and 170.000 from elsewhere each year. Preference is given to those who are scientists, professionals, or victims of political oppression, and to those having relatives in the United States. There are no longer any strict national quotas. The Contributions of Immigrants Textbooks often contain long lists of immigrants who made imped tant contributions to American society. The lists are usually filled with names of famous men and women: political leaders, authors, musicians, inventors, athletes, soldiers, and so forth. Without exception, every immigrant group has distinguished candidates for suchu list. But a list of people who became successful does not begin to indicate the major contributions of immigrants to American life. U walk through any major city offers far richer data. Look at the New York subways, built largely by the labor of Irish | and Italians. Look at the restaurants, with food whose recipes camel in the holds of ships from ports around the world. Observe the I architecture, reminiscent of Europe, Asia, or the Middle East d churches, stores, and houses. Enter the shops of importers whomtd to their homelands each year to buy fresh stock. Watch the billboards j advertising dance troupes and orchestras filled with foreign-boni artists. Most of all, look at the people. All Americans are immigrants 1 and the offspring of immigrants. And all have contributed to the infinite variety and richness of the nation. On September 22, 1919, nearly a year after the war had ended, the steelworkers struck. The steel strike of 1919 was a complex affair. But the real issue focused on the workers' demand that the steel companies deal with them collectively. The officers of the companies agreed to talk to any individual worker who wanted to complain about his wages or his conditions of work. The workers insisted, however, that the companies must deal with them through a few leaders chosen by the workers to discuss terms for all. This is what "collective bargaining" meant. The American Federation of Labor, an alliance of established trade unions, aided the steelworkers in their struggle. Despite this assistance, the strike required strenuous efforts and sacrifices from the steelworkers themselves. In many ways, they had to readjust their own picture of themselves. Unskilled immigrant workers and skilled, often native-born, workers had to cooperate. The steel companies also faced a readjustment. To accept collective bargaining meant to accept a powerful, rival voice in deciding wages and in determining the organization of work and community life. The companies resisted this adjustment. With the help of the federal, state, and local governments, the press, and many of the churches, the companies were finally able to defeat the workers' efforts to unionize the industry. After the strike, a group of Protestant clergymen investigated the causes of the strike and the reasons for its failure. Reading 66 is taken from their report. As you read, think about these questions: Abridged. Language simplified. Reprinted by permission. The Interchurch World Movement represented several Protestant denominations working together to help solve the social problem of industrial society. During the strike, the leaders of the movement worked to arrive at a peaceful solution. After it was over, they investigated the strike. This portion of their report analyzes some of the sources of strikers' discontent. The determination of immigrant workers to assert themselves was the chief reason why the foreign and the English press, and especially the "American" [native-born] elements of society, considered the strike as having deeper motives than mere demands of ordinary trade unionism. Not only the mill managers, but all the governing classes in steel towns were accustomed to seeing immigrants docile and jnissive. To them any strike was indeed a revolution. Formerly immigrants obeyed orders without questioning. They did the pleasant work, the heavy and exhausting work, and never asked i reason why. I They had submitted for years to militaristic mill discipline. In the munity they had acted in the same way. They had lived their away from the others, at first purposely keeping out of their y. Then as they became "Americanized," they began in recent to assert themselves as members of the community. As one rican" minister explained it, "The foreigners want too much, iy own the largest churches in the community, are buying up the Tperty, and are now even running their own candidates for political fe." Most important, the immigrants in the steel mills had tasted better Editions during the war. They had had an opportunity to earn more t working on the better-paying jobs. For the first time they had a treated considerately by the foreman, etc. In the community, w had also been looked upon differently, that is either as "Ameri- V or as worthy allies. | The immigrant workers took these new developments seriously. And "y were very much disillusioned after the signing of the armistice ?n the employers and the dominant elements in the community Lk the attitude that, now the war was over, it was time to return all the old conditions. The immigrants were again "Hunkies." This s the last straw. Thereafter they waited for anybody to lead them jo the promised land. It was because the immigrants deepest emotions and instincts were ed that this huge and unprecedented strike was possible. The igrants wanted not only better wages and shorter hours. They "nted being treated as a possession or a "Hunky ." Not Unionism, but Americanism One portion of the clergymen s report contained an interview men Bishop J. McConnell and Dr. Daniel A. Poling, who repre- ted the Interchurch World Movement and Judge Elbert II. Gary, ~man of the Executive Committee of the United States Steel ration. Selections from that interview follow. Mr. Gary insisted that the point at issue was not now unionism such, but whether the American government should be supported 1 American institutions upheld. He insisted that the whole move- tof the steel strike was a movement of Communists. He repeatedlyv ► Some people think it is acceptable to refer jokingly to members of ethnic, racial, or religious minorities by terms such as "Hunky" as long as no insult is intended Do you think this practice is all right? Why. or why not? Public Opinion and the Steel Strike, pp. 336-338. Language simplified. Extortion is the practice of obtaining money through threats, violence, or misuse of authority. ► Should private citizens bring charges against officials, such as police officers, who treat them badly? Why or why not? The poor, ignorant foreigner residing on the great east side of the city has been especially subjected to a brutal and infamous rule by the police. In the lower criminal courts, it is beyond a doubt that innocent people who have refused to yield to criminal extortion, have been clubbed and harassed and confined in jail. It is generally agreed that the municipal police are imsurpassed in efficiency and desire to protect life and property upon New York streets. It is a significant fact that little corruption has been traced into the pockets of the ordinary patrolman. His sins are mainly abuse of physical force, infringement upon the rights and privileges of private citizens, and failure to reveal the criminal conduct of his superiors. A stream of witnesses poured continuously into the sessions of the committee. Their testimony proved that many of the members of the force, and even superior officers, have abused the physical power which has been given to them. In making arrests and in restraining disorder, they gratify personal spite and brutal instincts by reducing their victims to a servile condition. Even in the eyes of our foreign-born residents our institutions have been degraded. Those who have fled from oppression abroad have come here to be oppressed in a professedly free and liberal country. It appears, therefore, that the police formed a separate and highly privileged class. They are armed with the authority and the machinery for oppression and punishment. But they are practically free themselves from the workings of the criminal law. We emphasize finding police brutality because it affects every citizen, whatever his or her condition. It shows an invasion of constitutional liberty by one of the departments of government, whose supreme duty is to enforce the law. And it establishes a condition gravely endangering safety and welfare. Violence on the Mining Frontier In many places on the timber and mining frontiers of the West, a small number of employers dominated local business and government. Workers in these areas often felt that they had little control over either their working lives or their political fortunes. The lalror unions formed by miners and loggers frequently expressed the idea that democracy was a sham, cloaking the potver of a few rich people. Meetings between angry union members and powerful employers often led to violence. This selection is from a report on a bitter strike in Idaho Springs, Colorado. ps. But even without bad weather, the long drive was falling victim the advance of settlement. Railroads blocked the trails. So did the d-wire fences of people who established settled ranches and ;ers who tried to protect their fields from the cattle herds. Cattle shad led to state quarantine laws which complicated interstate tes. Cattle ranchers began to fence off their lands. The ranch ced the long drive across the public domain. The cowboys lingered .domesticated on ranches. The glamorous days of the cattle frontier 1 into history. Fanners' Last Frontier More than any other factor, the rush of farmers into the West ended picturesque days of the mining and cattle frontiers. A number stars accounted for this movement. Tales of rich lands and fantastic per acre whetted the appetites of easterners. Immigrants from pe were willing to purchase farms in more settled areas. The ds provided transportation to the West and a way to market Furthermore, they encouraged settlement through offers of their at cheap prices. The invention of barbed wire by J. F. Glidden, 1874, solved the fencing problem in a land where trees were scarce, i wells and windmills provided a supply of fresh water on the Immigrants did not know how to farm on the frontier where they had to cope with either a dense forest or the thick sod of the prairie. Hence, they moved in behind frontier farmers. 