Although we have stressed that the majority of settlers in America during the Colonial Period were of English stock, we must emphasize the fact that a great many people from other nations came to America during the Colonial Period. It has been estimated that there were more than 100,000 Scotch-Irish in the colonies prior to 1776 and at least as many immigrants from Germany. As one historian has pointed out, "eight nationalities were represented on the initial voyage of Christopher Columbus to America, and the new continent received its name from a Germun map maker working in a French college and in honor of a great Italian explorer sailing under the flag of Portugal." Historian Carl Wittke describes one important group of non-English colonials. The place which had the most appeal for the Scotch-Irish in America . . . was Pennsylvania, owing to its attractive climate and its liberal laws. By 1750, the Scotch-Irish element here made up about one fourth of the total population of the colony. By the time of the Revolution, Benjamin Franklin estimated it at 350,000, or one third of the total. Forced by their own poverty to seek the area of free lands . . . the Scotch-Irish of Pennsylvania became the typical western "Squatters" [people who settled on unoccupied land without having a right or title to it] . . . the frontier guard of the colony. The Scotch-Irish were the less permanent settlers, who frequently sold out their little clearings to the second wave of immigrants. Secretary Logan of Pennsylvania wrote in 1729 that "it looks as if Ireland is to send all her inhabitants hither," and stated that any five Scotch-Irish families make more trouble than fifty of any other nationality. It is obvious that most of the trouble arose from the fact that the newcomers squatted on the proprietor's lands, for Logan went on to complain that both the Scotch-Irish and the Germans frequently sit down on any spot of vacant land they can find, without asking question. . . ." The Scotch-Irishman was the typical frontiersman in early America. He was bold, courageous, democratic to a point of lawlessness, highly individualistic, a "squatter," a hater of Indians, and a strong opponent and critic of the established order. The Scotch-Irish came from the Scottish border, where raids, feuds, and petty warfare had been the rule for centuries. ... In the American colonies, the Scotch-Irishman was the frontiersman par excellence, "the long-limbed pioneer with the long knife, the long gun, and the long memory. He carried the long rifle to the American frontier. He seemed always ready for a fight and had many prejudices. As far as the latter were concerned, the Scotch-Irish frontiersman followed the Scriptural injunction to smite and utterly destroy the heathen whenever the Lord delivered him into his hands, . . . In Pennsylvania, the frontier spirit of the Scotch-Irish element came into sharp conflict with Quaker leaders who controlled the government of the colony. . . . The Quakers were pacifists, opposed to war even with the Indians; the Scotch- Irishman, living on the exposed frontier, had different ideas of his duty toward the Indian, and.believed in wiping out the heathen. The Scotch-Irish squatted on land which belonged to the proprietors, had not yet been opened to settlement, and whose occupation frequently involved trouble with the native owners. Finally, the democratic frontiersman resented the political monopoly of the eastern counties in the government of Pennsylvania. Again and again, petitions from Cumberland County for help and munitions to deal with the Indian menace were rejected by the Quaker government, which opposed the creation and expense of an effective frontier militia. The Scotch-Irish, and others on the frontier, complained bitterly that, while the Quakers used "soft words" and paid tribute to the Indians in the form of presents, "the Dutch and Irish are murder'd without Pity." 1 According to Carl Wittke's account, what would you say were the most outstanding characteristics of the Scotch-Irish colonists? How does his description compare with your image of William Penn and the Quakers? The Germans A long series of European wars was a main cause of German migration to America during the Colonial Period. At that time, Germany was a collection of small states and principalities, each with its own ruler. The heavy taxes which these rulers placed upon their subjects in order to pay for the wars between the German principalities and other European powers made the life of the common man in Germany almost unbearable. Crop failures and famine which occurred at approximately the same time added to the plight of the people, and in the eighteenth century thousands of Germans made their way to America. There were substantial German settlements in New York, Virginia, Maryland, and North Carolina, but like the Scotch-Irish, the Germans found the climate and the tolerant policies of Pennsylvania most to their liking. By the time of the American Revolution, approximately one-third of the population of that colony was German. As you read the follow- ins account of these people in America, ask yourself the question we have been asking of all the various groups who faced the challenges of America: What do you think the colonial Germans added to the making of America? The Pennsylvania German farmer, like every other pioneer, went to work with his axe as soon as he arrived in America. He usually selected a wooded area for his future homestead, for he knew this to be the best farming land. Like other pioneers, many a Pennsylvania German farmer began life in a sod house or "cave," and then passed rapidly through the succeeding stages of die log cabin to the large stone houses which still mark the "Pennsylvania Dutch" sections. They were often erected on the slope of a hill, with one side only one story high, and many of them had a date stone near the gable indicating the name of the owner and the date of construction. Near by or underneath the house was the spring, which served as refrigerator, and near by was also an outside bakehouse. Roofs were generally of tile. Even more important than the houses were the huge barns. Frequently they were made of stone at the bottom and of frame higher up, and painted yellow or red. The Pennsylvania German barn is recognizable in all localities in which the German farmers settled. It frequently overshadowed the house in importance and received major attention. These barns were two stories high, with pitched roofs, suggestive of the type used in Europe. They were sufficiently large and so well built that heavy teams could be driven into the upper story to load anti unload grain. A normal size was 100 feet long, 40 feet wide, and 40 or 50 feet high. The lower story contained the stables, with feeding passages opening on the front. The front of the upper story projected eight or ten feel over the lower to provide shelter for wagons and tools. It contained the hay mows and grain lofts, and served as the threshing floor. Hie German farmer took great pride in his sleek and well- fed cattle, housed them well instead of letting them roam w ild over the countryside, and was frequently accused of taking better care of his livestock than of his family. A frenchman, recording his observations in 1795, wrote: "The houses are small, and kept in very had order; the barns are large, and in very good repair." . . . The Pennsylvania German farmer had a reputation for hard work. He cut down the trees in making his clearing and gradually removed the stumps, instead of merely girdling them [cutting a ring of bark from the trees so they would die] and leaving them to rot in the ground. He knew how to feed and care for his livestock, and lie constructed high fences to keep out neighbors' animals. He was economical with his Wool supply as with everything else. The German farmers raised much of their simple vegetable diet in their own kitchen gardens, concentrating especially on cabbage and turnips. They were probably the first to cultivate asparagus and cauliflower in America. Their Conestoga wagons, drawn by four or eight horses, were "ships of inland commerce." The bottom of the wagon box was long and slightly curved and often painted blue. Canvas, of linen or hemp, covered the arches made of poles and hoops of wood, giving the effect of a huge bonnet. The running gears were generally painted a bright red. The Pennsylvania Germans had large families, because children were an economic asset. They worked extremely hard, had the instinct for owning property, and were desirous of having each generation add something to their [holdings]. That little was left for the niceties and refinements of life in such a rigid regime of grubbing for a living need hardly be stressed. COLONISTS IN BONDAGE: The Slaves In our examination thus far of the various groups of people who were the first to face the challenges of America, we have spoken only of those who came to America free to pursue whatever rewards they could obtain. What we cannot ignore is the fact that there were thousands who came without freedom. These people fall into two main classifications—slaves and indentured servants. Victims of Portuguese Slave Hunters in Africa The first blacks were brought to mainland America as early as 1619. At first the blacks were treated as indentured servants, but bv 1700 nearly all the blacks brought to America became slaves. The great majority of these slaves were put to work on plantations in the South. In considering our basic question—Who were the people who made America?—we must keep two important facts in mind: many great contributions by black people to American history have not been recognized; the blacks' contributions have been limited by the fact that for more than the first two centuries of this nation's history the black people were held in slavers'. Of all the cruelties the slave suffered, one of the most brutal was the voyage to America. Still dazed and confused by his sudden capture in Africa, unable to understand the white man's language or even his own fate, the slave was often in a state of shock by the time he reached America. One of the very few firsthand accounts of this terrible experience is that by a slave named Custavus Vassa. The part which deals with his voyage to America is printed below. The first thing I saw when 1 got to the coast was the sea. I also saw a slave ship which was waiting for its cargo. These filled me with so much astonishment and terror, that I still cannot fully describe my feelings at the time. Once I was on the ship I saw a large furnace and a great many black people chained together. I did not doubt my fate once 1 saw the sadness and horror which their faces expressed. Overcome with horror and grief, I fainted on the deck, 1 was put down under the decks, and with the terrible smells that I encountered there and the crying, 1 became so ill and dejected that I had neither the desire nor the ability to eat. I wished for Death to relieve me. Soon, two white men offered me food. When 1 refused to eat, one of them held me by the hands and laid me across the windlass. My feet were then tied and I was whipped severely... Shortly after, 1 found some people from my own nation among those who were chained. 1 asked them what was to he done with us. They told me that we were to be taken to the white people's country where we would be made to work for them. 1 was then a bit revived and thought if it were no worse than working, my situation was not as desperate as I had first imagined. However, since the white people looked a|ul acted so savagelv, I still feared that I would be put to death. 1 could not help expressing my fears to some of my coun- •pmen. 1 asked them if the white people had a country. I 1 'ought perhaps that they lived in this hollow place. My countrymen told me that the white people came from a distant land, I then asked what made the ship go. Adapted from Gustaous Vassa, The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Custavus Vassa, the African (Norwich: 1794). 1975 attached to the masts by ropes and that the ship went on... One day two of my countrymen who were chained together jumped into the sea. They preferred death to a life of such misery. Then another followed their example. 1 believe that many more would have done the same if they had not been prevented by the ship's crew who were immediately alarmed. The most active of us were then put under the deck. There was much noise and confusion with the people of the ship shouting to stop the ship and go back to those who had jumped into the water. Two of the poor creatures were drowned. The other was saved but afterwards he was whipped unmercifully for having preferred death to slav- ery— Finally, we came in sight of the island of Barbadoes. . . . Many merchants and planters now came on board. They put us into separate groups and examined us with great attention. We thought that we would be eaten by these ugly men. When we were all put down under deck again, there was much dread and trembling among us; and our bitter cries could be heard all through the night. Finally, the white people sent some slaves from the land to calm us. These slaves told us that we were not going to be eaten but would be taken to the land to work and we would see many of our country people. This report gave us ease and soon we were taken to the land where we were led immediately to the merchant's yard. There, without regard to age or sex, we were herded together like sheep. What struck me was that the houses were made of bricks, in stories, and were completely different than anything I had ever seen. I was even more astonished to see people on horseback. I did not know what this could mean. 1 thought that these white people were filled with magical arts. In a few days we were sold in the merchant's usual manner which is as follows: On a signal given by the beat of a drum, the buyers rush into the yard where the slaves are kept. They choose the one they like best. The noise and clamour which accompany this and the eagerness visible in the faces of the buyers serve to increase the fears of the terrified slaves. ... In this manner relatives and friends are separated, most of them never to see each other again. 1 remember that in the ship in which I was brought over there were several brothers who were sold in different lots. It was very moving to see and hear their cries as they were parted. It has often been overlooked that during the Colonial Period slavery was common in the North as well as in the South. In the passage that follows, historian Lorenzo Greene describes various aspects of slavery in colonial New England. Not only was Negro labor in New England used in specific tasks, but many Negroes fell into the category of "Jack of all trades." That is, they were able to turn their hands to several different kinds of work. Nowhere did the Negro show' greater adaptability to the labor needs of New' England than in this capacity, for the "handy" man was almost [essential] to Yankee masters, especially on the farm. The slave, then, who w'as equally adept at tilling the soil, shoeing a horse, chopping wood, or repairing a fence, was extremely valuable to his master. Negro women who could cook, spin, sew, milk, preserve fruit, make maple sugar and if necessary take a turn in the field u'ere similarly [of great value]. The very nature of New England's complex economy, together with the ever present labor shortage, made it necessary for the slave or servant, like the master, to be able to do more than one thing. Indeed, it is probable that most of the New England slaves actually belonged in this class. On this point, newspaper [accounts] are [important]. A slave might be advertised as skilled in "all sorts of household work, used to the cooper's business and a very good sailor"; another as fit for either skilled labor or "country work"; a third as "capable of doing all sorts of house work and has likewise been used to the printing business," and a fourth, as one "that can do any sort of work indoors or out [and] can work at the ship carpenter's trade." It was not necessary to own slaves in order to use their services, for persons who needed labor could occasionally hire Negroes. Masters who did not wish to support them in idleness, often hired them out in an effort to realize something from their investments. Newspaper advertisements reflect this situation: a Boston master offered to hire out a "Negro woman about 30 years of age capable of any household work, and can be well recommended"; another Negro girl "fit to attend family"; a Negro man who "plays well on the violin," and a Negro man "fit for town or country work." The labor market was evidently [crowded with] this particular type of individual for the last advertisement appeared in three consecutive weekly issues. The hiring out of slaves seems to have been a general practice. As early as 1694 Judge John Saffin of Boston rented his slave, Adam, to Thomas Shepard, promising the slave his freedom at the end of seven years. Attention has already been directed to the subsequent hiring out of slaves as seamen and mechanics. When a slave was rented, master and renter entered into a formal contract, specifying the length of service, nature of payment, and compensation which the master should receive for the hire of his slave. Thus in 1702 when Samuel Lynde of Boston hired out his Negro to serve as cook aboard a privateer during Queen Anne's War (1702-1713), Lynde was to be paid one full share of the prizes taken by the ship. 1 Does Lorenzo Greene passage give any clues as to why slavery would eventually be abolished in the North? Explain. 2 Compare the life of slaves in Greene's account with that in Vassa's account. Indentured Servants The slaves were not the only class of people who came to colonial America in bondage. Thousands came as indentured servants— bound to serve a colonial master for a specified number of years and then to be set free. There were many reasons why individuals agreed to become indentured servants, and they came in great numbers. It has been estimated that more than half of all the people who came to the colonies south of New England came as indentured servants. In the passage below, historian Abbot Smith described some of the motives of these people and the provisions of indenture itself. What is your opinion of such u system? This [account] ... is about those white people who went to the British colonies in North America and who, because they were unwilling or unable to pay the cost of their own passage, became bond servants for a period of years to some colonial master who paid it for them. They were variously known as indentured servants, redemptioners, or servants. Many of them were convicts from the jails, transported instead of being hanged; a few were political and military prisoners taken in war or rebellion. There were rogues, vagabonds, cheats, and rabble of all descriptions, raked from the gutter and kicked out of the country. There were unfortunate French, German, and Swiss Protestants fleeing from religious persecution, starving and unhappy Irish, Scottish tanners, poverty-stricken German peasants and artisans, )rash adventurers of all sorts. There were many ordinary individuals of decent substance, and a few even who were entitled by the custom of the time to be called gentlemen. More than half of all persons who came to the colonies south of New England were servants. The Puritan community S> scanty *n their agriculture, unfriendly to newcomers as were, received few. Reprinted by permission of The University of North Carolina Press and The Institute of Early American History and Culture. The first challenge to the immigrant was an enormous one. It came as soon as he hoarded the vessel which would take him to America. In Part I of this Unit, we saw that the journey from Europe to America in colonial times was generally a terrifying experience. By the early nineteenth century, conditions had changed very little. Greedy sea captains packed as many into each vessel as they could. Food often ran out. Shipwrecks and disease took a terrible toll. Yet millions risked it all for a new life in America. The terror and hardship did not end with the voyage itself. When the ship docked in America—most often in New York—the newcomers were kept waiting while they and their belongings were examined. Many were sent to Ellis Island in New York harbor to be examined again or to await a decision on whether they would ever be allowed to enter the country. In the account that follows, an Irish immigrant describes his experience upon his arrival in New York. What did he mean when he said, "Travelling in immigrant fashion was all right after one had done with it"? At ten o'clock in the evening the big French liner from Havre came to anchor in the harbor of New York, and six hundred immigrants, Armenian, Greek, Turk, Italian, French, what not, craned over her rail to look on the fascinating lights of the immense city of their new land. They were told that the ship would move no further that night, and that it would he well to go below and get some sleep; hut they paid no attention, and dawn found them still there, wakefully gazing. Not until the last night-light died out did these watchers' go below, and then it was to hurry bags and bundles on deck. At five o'clock, every one of them was up on his toes ready to step ashore at the word, but it was seven o'clock before they were allowed to move, and then it was to make ready for the doctors, who had just climbed aboard. Down one long gangway and up the other we were marched —citizens and foreigners alike; nationality made no difference where all were mere "steerage"[the section of the ship occupied by passengers paying the lowest fares]. At the rate of forty to the minute we went by the doctor and his staff, who stood in the waist and reviewed us... After this inspection the steerage dragged up its very last bags and bundles and chests. Six hundred of them there were, and with all their belongings they camped on deck. They made a pretty tight fit for one deck, and on one deck they had to stay. Later, it was like prying the first block out of a square of paving to get them started. It was a blistering morning in July, and for two hours we sizzled in the blaze, until at last some blessed body up ahead said we might move. We moved, at first with [great] slowness. hut in a little while more rapidly. By the time one little bunch reached the head of the gangplank, we were moving beyond all question. The people half a dozen numbers ahead of us were bumping down the runway like cakes of ice down a chute, and yet a man said, "Hurry! hurry!" Cakes of ice may be skidded with speed when the runs are well greased, but they do not always stop gracefully. A band of Armenians, with bundles behind and before them, went clattering before us down the cleated runway like men thrown down-stairs. Two men at the foot "kept tab. One had to use a baseball umpire's indicator for bis count, but the other, a greater brain, thought that he. needed no mechanical aid tcx keep his reckoning. He counted us by a system of fours; but presently the struggling throng confused him and be grew angry. His system broke down when his companion counted one of us 1 as number three hundred and sixty-eight, anil he had only reached number three hundred and sixty-four. On the dock it was a noisy assemblage. Here was where a universal language would have been worth everybody's knowing. These friendless people stool helplessly about, waiting for somebody to come and tell them what to do. Officials who might have made things a hit easier for them seemed to prefer to add to their bewilderment. Some that sought aid were waved away with indifference. "We ll get ar°und to you," was a common reply. All the Jacks in office scorned these poor people, and they were made to feel it. lo the command of any loud-voiced truckman they jumped aside like rabbits, and beneath the mere look of anything in uniform they shrank like mice. A lifeless-looking man behind a small stand-up desk was registering the lucky ones with "papers"—the American cit- Im migrants on hoard, ship (left) and at Ellis Island (below) izens who had been home for a visit. He might have been registering cattle. His ambition, seemingly, was to be regarded as a man who could be flustered by nothing on top of this earth. He only moved his fingers to fill in blank lines on one big sheet and a lot of little slips. His jaws seemed made to chew tobacco—he did not move them to speak. Some citizens, native born, American by every word and action, approached this impassive creature, saying: "We are American citizens who have come third class. Can we be passed out?" "Passport?" "No, but if—" "Any sworn statement that you are American citizens?" "No. We did not plan on anything like this. If you will look at these—" "Don't want to look. If you have no regular papers stand aside," An Italian who could just say "Yes," "No," and "Fee- ladelfy" then presented his stamped credentials, and was passed out. Another, who had no credentials, stood ready to [swear] that he was born in America 60 years ago. He had to get an interpreter to tell his story. His dismissal was as abrupt as ours. The great body had no papers, had no hope of any shorter cpt to liberty than by way of Ellis Island, and so waited patiently with their packs beside them. They never wandered far away from their packs. By and by they were told the inspector wished them to get in line and be ready for him. They hurried to arrange themselves in a row with their bundles opened up. In about an hour the inspector walked along the line, chalking his initials about as fast as he coidd step from one to the other. There was little suspicion of valuable stuffs concealed there. After a time we learned that to get out we had only to swear that we were born in America and were citizens. Then we "went for" the man behind the desk, who could have attended to us before, and he took our abuse as, doubtless, be would have taken our praise—without changing a muscle. Given our slips, we hurried out of that darkened dock, out into the free sunshine of West Street. There we took a good long look at the United States. Travelling in immigrant fashion was all right after one had done with it. 1 Why do you think that most of the people aboard the vessel had such a timid attitude? 2 How did the immigrant feel about the officials he encountered? Do you think he was justified? Explain. 3 In your opinion, what effect would an entry into America such as you have just read have on a newcomer? Do you think it might affect his future actions? How? 1575 It was only natural that many of the newcomers to America would seek to settle on farmland rather than in the city. Many of them had worked the soil in their native lands. This was true of the Scandinavians, for example. Eighty percent of the Norwegian immigrants became pioneer farmers and settled on the Great Plains and in the Pacific Northwest. For all the immigrants to the vast, open territories that became the plains states, the challenges of America were enormous. On the plains there was a specific type of a challenge— incredible loneliness. The grass stretched for hundreds of miles along the flat plains of the Minnesota and Nebraska territories. Earliest accounts tell us that at the time the first settlers arrived in these territories there were not even any birds there to sing. Small bands of Scandinavian immigrants made their way through these new territories, built houses of sod, and made farmland out of desolate prairie. Those who followed passed by and pushed even further west, opening up new land but keeping settlements far apart. Months might go by before the residents of a particular farm would see another human being. Terrifying blizzards in the winter and fear of the Indians who still roamed the plains added to the incredible hardships these immigrants endured. One of the most famous of all the Scandinavian immigrants who came to America and settled in the plains states was O.E. Rolvaag. His book Giants in the Earth is a classic tale of the life of these pioneers. An excerpt from the article "Rolvaag the Fisherman Shook His Fist at Fate,"Lincoln Col- cord, The American Magazine. All of my people for generations had followed the sea, and at fifteen 1 had taken my place in the fisheries. It was a hard life, and I went at it hard. There was nothing else to do. 1 had been a failure at school, while my older brother had been a brilliant success. When my father took me out of school at the age of fourteen, he had told me bitterly that education was not for me. And I had believed it; the iron had sunk deep into my soul. 1 had to prove that I was worth something in other directions. I am proud to say that 1 became a good fisherman and an expert seaman. But I wasn't satisfied. There was something else I wanted in life, yet 1 couldn't put my finger on it. In 1893, the twenty-fifth of January to be exact, I remember the whole fishing fleet was caught out in a terrible storm. Many of my friends were lost that day. The man I sailed with was an old Viking, the finest seaman I have ever known. He brought us through the storm by superhuman efforts. How I loved and admired him for this and other feats. Yet, thinking the experience over afterwards, it struck me that my way of living was awfully futile. In fact, that storm changed my nature. As the seas broke over us and I believed that death was inescapable, I felt a resentment against Destiny. Why was my life to be snuffed out just as it was about to begin? I was going to die without a chance to express my real self, to show what was in me. It seemed such utter nonsense! But 1 had to keep with the fishing to earn my living; and two more years went by. At last I wrote to my uncle who had emigrated to South Dakota. I asked him if he could send me a ticket to .America. I said that I would pay him back after I arrived. One day the next summer the ticket came. Annually, a great market was held at the little town of Bjorn, about twenty English miles from my home. There was much merrymaking and dancing. I sailed over with my master, the old sea king who had saved my life two years before. On the way I told him my plans—that I was going to quit the fishing and emigrate to America. He objected fiercely. As soon as we got ashore, he said, "Come here. I want to show you something." He led me down among the new boats exposed for sale, the first fishing craft of their kind on the coast of Norway. We looked them all over. At last he picked out the best boat of the lot, a brand-new hull built to carry a crew of five men. 1 had never seen such a handsome craft. "As you know, I am fairly well-to-do," he said. "I like you, and you like me. You are making a great mistake. If you will send back that ticket to your uncle, I will buy this boat for you." Well, you can imagine! Here was success, material success, along with the backing of the man 1 respected above all others. I can honestly say that I have never felt such a surge of pride. Yes; it made me proud and happy—and very, very- sad. His generous offer only complicated everything in a way that tore my heart. 'Thank you, sir," I said shortly. "I will have to think it over. Give me till tonight." Then I turned and left the row of new boats, walked through the town, and climbed the hill behind it. Somewhere up on the hillside I sat down. I sat there all afternoon. It was a fine clear day. I sat there gazing off across the fiord. What ought 1 to do? How could I refuse such a splendid offer? Down below in the town they were having a jolly time. The sound of it came up to me. I might have been the gayest of the lot; but now I felt entirely cut off from the others. I had to decide something, life had made me tragic. Would my heart stop aching as I set sail, as I paid for the boat and grew prosperous as the years w-ent by? On the other hand, what was my heart aching for? I honestly didn't know. I just felt that I wasn't fulfilling myself. I wanted to go away, find out what the world was like, and see if I didn't fit in somewhere else. But how could I explain that to sensible, practical people? To their minds, I'd simply be acting like a fool. . . , I finally did manage to make up my mind that afternoon, though it meant a heartbreaking struggle. I came down into the town at last and hunted up my master, the old Viking. I marched straight up to him and looked him in the eye, a deep, piercing eye it was, too. "I'm sorry, sir," I said, "but I cannot accept your offer. I have decided to go to America." "You're a fool!" he said and turned away. I went to a port down the coast and took ship for the New World. I was nothing but a boy from the provinces, ignorant of travel. You'll have an idea of the extent of my wardrobe when I tell you that I wore one shirt from Norway to South Dakota; it had its last washing the day before we arrived in New York. The ocean voyage was only a pleasure for me. The sea was my home. Meals were furnished with my ticket, there were plenty of Norwegians to talk to, and I had nothing to worry about except to wonder what would happen when I got ashore. But when I landed in New York things were very different. The vast harbor, the teeming city, and the alien language threw me into a terrible confusion. I couldn't speak or understand a word of English. It wasn't until 1 got on board the train that I discovered meals weren't furnished with my railroad ticket. By that time I was down to ten cents in American money and a copper pocket piece from Norway. 1 went without food for three days and three nights, all the way from New York to South Dakota. I left the train at a little station on the Dakota prairie. Looking around, I saw nothing but level land, like the sea. My uncle was to have met me but had made a mistake in the day of my arrival. I tried to ask my way, but no one at the station spoke Norwegian. At last a Swede who worked on the railroad came along, and I was able to communicate with him. He thought he knew approximately where my uncle lived, and gave me some directions; 1 had a twelve-mile walk ahead of me. When he found that I hadn't eaten for three days, he gave me what remained in his dinner pail— one sandwich and some coffee. By this time the sun was going down. I struck out on foot, soon lost my way, and walked far into the night. It was one of those still prairie nights, breathless with heat. I've learner! to love them since, but then I was worn out and discouraged. I felt as if 1 had been dropped down in the midst of nowhere. At last 1 came upon something in the darkness, a man driving a horse hitched to a wagon. The man was a Norwegian, and he took me to the farm where my uncle was employed. I stumbled into the house more dead than alive. In that experience I learned the first lesson of the immigrant. It was the first and perhaps the greatest lesson: a feeling of utter helplessness, as if life had betrayed me. It comes from a sense of being lost in a vast strange land. In this case it was largely physical; but I soon met the spiritual phase of the same thing: the sense of being lost in a strange culture, the sense of being thrust somewhere outside the charmed circle of life. If you couldn't conquer that feeling you were lost indeed. Many couldn't ami didn't and many were lost thereby. 1 If you hail been Holvaag, would you have accepted the boat, or would you have come to America? Explain. 2 Why do you think people like Holvaag went to the prairie country? Explain. O. E. Holvaag was one of those who met the challenges of America and prospered. Not only did he join fellow pioneers in opening up a whole new section of America, but he also wrote a novel describing the incredible hardships faced by those who were the first to challenge the vastness and the loneliness of the Greut Plains. The passage below is taken from this book. Giants in the Earth. The account begins as a pioneer family has reached the urea of land where it wishes to stake its claim. The men have gone to the nearest settlement, fifty-two miles away, to file ownership papers. The mother, named Beret, and her children are left to put things in order. After they had milked the cow, eaten their evening porridge, and talked awhile to the oxen, she took the boys . . . and strolled away from camp... they went toward the hill; when they had reached the summit, Beret sat down and let her gaze wander aimlessly around. ... In a certain sense, she had to admit to herself, it was lovely up here. The broad expanse stretching away endlessly in every direction, seemed almost like the ocean—especially now, when darkness was ailing. It reminded her strongly of the sea, and yet it was jer- different. . . . This formless prairie had no heart that 3eat, no waves that sang, no soul that could be touched. . . °r cared. he infinitude surrounding her on every hand might not ave been so oppressive, might even have brought her a -- of peace, if it had not been for the deep silence, i(h lay heavier here than in a church. All along the way, coming out, she had noticed this strange thing: the stillness had grown deeper, the silence more depressing, the farther west they journeyed; it must have been over two weeks now since she had heard a bird sing! Had they travelled into some nameless, abandoned region? Could no living thing exist out here, in the empty, desolate, endless wastes of green and blue? . . . How could existence go on, she thought, desperately. If life is to thrive and endure, it must at least have something to hide behind!. . . . . . As her eyes darted nervously here and there, flitting from object to object and trying to pierce the purple dimness that was steadily closing in, a sense of desolation so profound settled upon her that she seemed unable to think at all. It would not do to gaze any longer at the terror out there, where everything was turning to grim and awful darkness . . . She threw herself back in the grass and looked up into the heavens. But darkness and infinitude lay there, also... Suddenly, for the first time, she realized the full extent of her loneliness, the dreadful nature of the fate that had overtaken her. Lying there on her back, and staring up into the quiet sky across which the shadows of night were... creeping, she went over in her mind every step of their wanderings, every mile of the distance they had travelled since they had left home. Farther and farther onward . . . always west . . . For a brief while there had been a chance to relax once more; they had travelled on water again, and she could hear the familiar splash of waves against the ship's side. This language she knew of old, and did not fear; it had lessened the torture of that section of the journey for her, though they had been subjected to much ill-treatment and there had been a great deal of bullying and brawling on board. At last the day had arrived when they had landed in Milwaukee. But here they were only to make a new start—to take another plunge into the unknown . . . Farther, and always farther . . . The relentless current kept whirling them along. Was it bound nowhere, then? Did it have no end? In the course of time they had come jogging into a place called Prairie du Chien . . . Had that been in Wisconsin, or some other place named after savages? It made no differ- ence—they had gone on. They had floundered along to Lansing, in Iowa . . . Onward again. Finally they had reached Fillmore County, in Minnesota . . . But even that wasn't the place, it seemed! Now she was lying here on a little green hillock, surrounded by the open, endless prairie, far off in a spot from which no road led back! ... It seemed to her that she had lived many lives already, in each one of which she had done nothing but wander and wander, always straying farther away from the home that was dear to her . . . The two boys and their little sister were having great fun up here. So many queer things were concealed under the tufts of grass. Store-Hans came running, and brought a handful of little flat, reddish chips of stone that looked as though they had been carved out of the solid rock; they were pointed at one end and broadened out evenly on both sides, like the head of a spear. The edges were quite sharp; in the broad end a deep groove had been filed. Ole brought more of them, and gave a eouple to his little sister to play with . . . The mother sat for a while with the stones in her lap, where the children had placed them; at last she took them up, one by one, and examined them closely . . . These must have been formed by human hands, she thought. Suddenly Ole made another rare discovery, lie brought her a larger stone, that looked like a sledge hammer; in this the groove was deep and broad. The mother got up hastily. "Where are you finding these things?" The boys at once took her to the place; in a moment she, too, was standing beside the little hollow at the brow of the hill, which the men hail discovered the night before; the queer stories that the children had been bringing her lay scattered all around. ''Ola says that the Indians made them!" cried Store-Hans, excitedly. "Is it true, mother?" ... Do you suppose they'll ever come back?" It stirred with so many unknown things! When We Came Where We Came From Iby {Mortal Tot"l 46 9 m.flion pcopM Historians frequently use statistics. Statistics are numerical facts which are assembled to show relationships. The statistics in the table to the right deal with the number of immigrants who came to America between 1820 and 1970. Study this table and then answer the questions. How many immigrants came to America from Russia in the period 1901-1910? How many came from all of Asia during the period 1931-1940? Between the years 1820 and 1900, what country sent the most immigrants to America? From which country in Europe did most immigrants come in the period 1901— 1910? According to these statistics, what was the busiest period of immigration to America? Statistics can be shown in many different ways. The graph and the map deal with the same subject, immigration, as the table you just examined. Look at them carefully and then answer the questions. Although a great many of the newcomers to the United States sought rural areas for their new homes, the vast majority remained in the large cities where they landed. The ships which brought the immigrants to America docked in the great ports of Boston, Philadelphia, Baltimore, New Orleans, San Francisco, and, most often, New York. For the peasants of Europe, the ways of the large American city were a rude shock. Most were used to living in European villages where they were surrounded by grass, clean air, trees, and sky. Furthermore, the village-type society of the Old World had allowed for close personal relations between all members of the community. In the cities of America, from which most immigrants never escaped, there was almost no grass and very few trees. In places like New York, newcomers lived in tenements so high and so close together that one could not even see the sun. In the account that follows, historian Oscar Handlin describes how most newcomers were forced to live in the city. He speaks also of how this way of life affected the immigrant himself. Do you think conditions for newcomers to the city today are similar to those described here? How might they be different? Adapted from The Uprooted by Oscar Handlin, by permission of Atlantic-Little, Brown and Company. Copyright © 1951 by Oscar Handlin. Such accommodations have additional attractions for the immigrants. They are close to the familiar region of the docks and they are within walking distance of the places where labor is hired; precious carfare will be saved by living here. In every American city some such district of first settlements receives the newcomers. Not that much is done to welcome them. The carpenters hammer shut connecting doors and build rude partitions up across the halls; middle-class homes thus become laborers' dwellings—only not one to a family, but shared among many. What's more, behind the original structures are grassy yards where children once had run about at play. There is to be no room for games now. Sheds and shanties, hurriedly thrown up, provide living space; and if a stable is there, so much the better: that too can be turned to account. In 1850 already in New York some seven thousand households are finding shelter in such rear buildings. By this time, too, 1500 cellars also do service as homes.[The pressure of an ever-rising demand for homes led to the development of the most common form of immigrant housing—the tenement.] Ultimately, [what were called] dumbbell tenements lined street after street—structures that took up almost the entire area of a real-estate plot. Attached to its neighbors on either side, it left vacant only a strip, perhaps ten feet deep, in the rear. On a floor space of approximately twenty by ninety feet, it was possible, within this pattern, to get four four-room apartments. These structures were at least six stories in height, sometimes eight. At the most moderate reckoning, twenty-four to thirty-two families could be housed on this tiny space, or more realistically, anywhere from one hundred and fifty to two hundred human beings. It was not a long block that held ten such tenements on either side of the street, not an unusual block that was home for some four thousand people. The flats were terribly small and overcrowded. In no room of the dumbbell tenement could you pace off more than eleven feet. In addition, the apartments shrank still further when shared by more than one family or when they sheltered lodgers, as did more than half those in New York at the end of the century. But that was not the worst of it. Here is a woman. In the Old Country she had lived much of her life, done most of her work, outdoors. In America, the flat confines her. She divides up her domain by calico sheets hung on ropes, tries to make a place for her people and possessions. But there is no place and she has not room to turn about. It is true, everything is in poor repair, the rain comes through the ceilings, the wind blows dirt through the cracks in the wall. But she does not even know how to go about restoring order, establishing cleanliness. . . . The street becomes the great artery of life for the people of these districts. Sometimes, the boys and girls play in back in the narrow yards, looking up at the lines of drying clothes that spiderweb the sky above them. More often the crowded street itself is the more attractive playground. They run in games through the moving traffic, find fun in the appearance of some hopeful street musician, or regard with envy the wares of the . . . [sellers] of seasonal delicacies, the sweet shaved ice of summer, the steaming potatoes, and chestnuts of fall and winter. The adults too drift out, sit on the steps, flow over onto the sidewalks, The women bring their work outdoors, the men at evening hang about, now and then talk. They begin to be neighborly, learn to be sensitive to each other. That is the good of it. There is also the bad. The street in its strangeness is the evidence of the old home's [falling apart]. Why, the very aspect is forbidding: the dear sun never shines brightly, the still air between the high buildings is so [filled] with stench it would take a dragon to hold out, These are all signs of the harshness of the physical environment, of the difficulties of living in these quarters, of the [breaking down] here of old ways. Those children in earnest play at the corner—who controls them, to what discipline arc they subject? They do not do the things that children ought. No one does the things he ought. The place prevents it. 1 Why was it so difficult for most immigrants to escape the city? 2 In what w'ays does living in the manner described by Oscar Hundlin affect an individual? How does it affect the family? The story of the immigrant in America is the story of many successes and many failures. Some were never able to adapt themselves to America and its way of life. Others overcame all obstacles and prospered, sometimes with the help of social agencies like the settlement house. In the selection below, we find traces of many of these factors in adjusting to life in America. This account is particularly significant if we consider that the wTiter, an Italian immigrant named Edward Corsi, later became Commissioner of Immigration at Ellis Island. "1 congratulate you, Corsi," a friend said on the day after my appointment as Commissioner of Immigration at Ellis Island. "You've got one of the most important jobs in the country. You'll be helping to make America. After all, you know, this nation is only 65 percent Plymouth Rock. The other 35 percent is Ellis Island." "I'm part of that thirty-five percent myself," T said. I was born in the medieval village of Capestrano in that part of Italy known as the Abruzzi. We lived within the natural wall of jagged hills and towering mountains which, due east of Rome, shuts in that rugged land. My father, in his youth, had become a disciple of the Italian patriot, Giuseppe Mazzini. The longing for freedom, not for himself alone but for his fellow men, was in my father's blood. In the newspaper which lie edited he waged relentless war on the entrenched classes living at the expense of the peasant. He often took me to mass meetings, where he spoke to enormous crowds. His leadership and ideals became known throughout Italy. Our lives had always been molded by my father's life; after he died we seemed to have no future. During the years from 1903 to 1907, when immigration to America was at its height, many Italians returned to the little towns in Italy boasting of their success in the United States. We saw strangers proudly wearing heavy gold watch chains that we knew had been bought in the New World. Stories of the ease with which money could be earned in America flew through the whole peninsula. Thousands of people, from grandfathers down to small boys like myself, came to center their interests in the wonderful new country. Toward the end of the fourth year after my father died, my mother married again. Her new husband, an ex-army officer, had the same name as my father, and they were distantly related. It was then I caught the first inkling that they were planning to go to America. My new father had resigned from the army. Immigrants at Ellis Island (both pages) My first impressions of the New World will always remain etched in my memory, particularly that hazy October morning when I first saw Ellis Island. The steamer Florida, 14 days out of Naples, had come at last through the Narrows into the Bay. My mother, my stepfather, my brother Giuseppe and my two sisters, Liberia and Helvetia, clustered on the foredeck and looked with wonder on this miraculous land of our dreams. . , . Directly in front of [our ship] half visible in the faintly colored haze, rose a . . . challenge to the imagination. "Mountains!" I cried to Giuseppe. "Look at them!" "They're strange," he said. "Why don't they have snow on them?" He was craning his neck and standing on tiptoe to stare at the New York skyline. Stepfather looked toward the skyscrapers, and, smiling, assured us that they w'ere not mountains, but buildings— "the highest buildings in the world." On every side the harbor offered its marvels: tugs, barges, sloops, lighters, sluggish freighters, and giant ocean liners— all moving in different directions, managing, by what seemed to us a miracle, to dart in and out and up and down without colliding with one another. Finally the Florida veered to the left, turning northward into the Hudson River, and now the incredible buildings of lower Manhattan came very close to us. . . . A small boat carried us from the pier to Ellis Island. Some of the passengers were obviously afraid and dreading the events of the next few hours. Crowded together upon the little deck, each family huddled over its trunks and boxes, suitcases or bundles wrapped in bedding. [Driven]they may all have been, my parents and all the others alike, by a single desire—to make a fresh start in a free country. They saw in the future, through their shadowy dreams, what they believed was an earthly paradise. They were convinced, long before they left Italy, that America had enough and more for all who wished to come. It was only a question of being desired by the strong and wealthy country, of being worthy to he admitted. Our little vessel coasted into the slip at Ellis Island. As we stepped from the gangplank to the land, 1 knew that my parents were thinking, as 1 was. What is next? We took our places in the long line and went [meekly] through the routine of answering interpreters' questions and receiving medical examinations. Soon we were permitted to pass through America's gateway, . . . Onr new home was a sad disappointment. We found ourselves paying what seemed an enormous price for four [dirty] tenement rooms. There was, t remember, but one outside window, and this looked down on a dingy street. My mother was discouraged by the sight of the apartment the moment she stepped into it, and she never overcame that feeling. Back in Italy, I had seen her sit and gaze for long hours at the quiet beauty of the countryside. Here she never left the house unless she had to. She would sit at that one outside window staring up at the little patch of sky above the tenements. She was never happy here and, though she tried, could not adjust herself to the poverty and despair in which we had to live. My stepfather had no special training except his military- service, and had to take employment at manual labor in a piano factory. He earned eleven dollars a week, which was barely enough to keep our bodies and souls together. He was brave and did all he could for us, but at the end of three years my mother, who had become ill, went hack to Italy. When she could no longer write us, others wrote for tier, and she constantly begged me not to forget the ideals of my father. She lived for only one year after returning to Italy. I am sure that our life on the East Side was typical of the lives of thousands upon thousands of immigrant families. There were many times when we had nothing to eat in the house. There was one period when my stepfather was out of work for 18 months. When I was old enough for my first job, I went to work as a lamplighter, rising at four in the morning to put out the lamps on my route. Then I would have breakfast and get to school by nine o'clock. All through my boyhood 1 worked at various odd jobs, paying my own way through school and at the same time contributing what little I could to the limited family income. 1 was, in turn, lamplighter, messenger, and clerk in a telegraph office. The few hours that remained for play, and they were few indeed, I spent in the sheets, i enjoyed the excitement. the crowds, and the good fellowship of the East Side. I enjoyed too the company of youngsters like myself, manyr of whom have risen above the handicaps of their surroundings to useful careers in the community. Down the street on which 1 lived there was a little brownstone house, which to many in the neighborhood seemed [surrounded by] mystery. It was a settlement house [a community center offering social and educational services to underprivileged people in a crowded part of a city]. The day came when we decided to investigate. The gang of boys with whom I played had decided to organize a club and have a baseball team. The police would not tolerate our presence on street corners and chased us, making it almost impossible for us to meet. We needed a club room, and [gathering] all our courage, we applied at the settlement house. I remember clearly the day I led my gang into that house of mystery. I was shabbily dressed and embarrassed, but I think my earnestness must have impressed the head worker, for she singled me out of the group and questioned me at length. She explained in terms that we could understand what she and her co-workers were doing in the neighborhood. We were admitted on probation. We were not to be rough or break windows, as other neighborhood boys had done. We were to have a meeting room and the use of the backyard gymnasium just as long as we behaved. My admission to the Home Garden, later Haarlem House, marked a decisive advance in my career. I became the leader of my group. 1 organized a baseball team and a debating team. I caught the spirit of the settlement and was never so happy as when I could spend long hours discussing the neighborhood problems and methods of solving them. Meanwhile, my settlement contacts and experiences gave me a new understanding of American life and American ideals. It was a new understanding, because until then such dreams as I had had of the land of promise were shattered by the grim reality of what I had been forced to undergo. It was as if a wide door to America had been opened to me. 1 What is meant by the statement, " ,.. this nation is only 65 percent Plymouth Rock. The other 35 percent is Ellis Island"? 2 What did Edward Corsi mean when he said, "It was as if a wide door to America had been opened to me"? The major opportunity for most immigrants to improve their lot and find a satisfactory adjustment to America was through education. In the account that follows, Mary Antin, a young immigrant from Russia, described her first day in an American school. Do you think most Americans today share Mary Antin's appreciation of American free public education? In America . . , everything was free, as we bad heard in Russia. Light was free; the streets were as bright as a synagogue on a holy day. Music was free; we had been serenaded, to our gaping delight, by a brass band of many pieces, soon after our installation on Union Place. Education was free. That subject my father had written about repeatedly, as comprising his chief hope for us children, the essence of American opportunity, the treasure that no thief could touch, not even misfortune or poverty. It was the one thing that he was able to promise us when he sent for us; surer, safer than bread or shelter. On our second day I was thrilled with the realization of what this freedom of education meant. A little girl from across the alley came and offered to [take] us to school. My father was out, but we five between us had a few words of English by this time. We knew the word school. We understood. This child, who had never seen us till yesterday, who could not pronounce our names, who was not much better dressed than we, was able to offer us the freedom of the schools of Boston! No application made, no questions asked, no examinations, ... no fees. The doors stood open for every one of us, The smallest child could show us the way. This incident impressed me more than anything I had heard in advance of the freedom of education in America. It was a concrete proof—almost the thing itself. One had to experience it to understand it. . . . The [height] of my civic pride and personal contentment was reached on the bright September morning when I entered the public school. That day I must always remember, even if I live to be so old that I cannot tell my name. To most people, their first day at school is a memorable occasion. In my case the importance of the day was a hundred times magnified, on account of the years I had waited, the road I had come, and the conscious ambitions I entertained. . , . Father himself conducted us to school. He would not have delegated that mission to the President of the United States. He had awaited the day with impatience equal to mine, and the visions he saw as he hurried us*over the sun-flecked pavements [went beyond] all my dreams. Almost his first act on landing on American soil, three years before, had been his application for naturalization. He had taken the remaining steps in the process with eager promptness, and at the earliest moment allowed by the law, he became a citizen of the United States. It is true that he had left home in search of bread for his hungry family, but he went blessing the necessity that drove him to America. The boasted freedom of the New World meant to him far more than the right to reside, travel, and work wherever he pleased; it meant the freedom to speak his thoughts, to throw off the shackles of superstition, to test his own fate, unhindered by political or religious tyranny. He was only a young man when he landed—thirty-two; yet most of his life he had been held in. . . . He was hungry for his untasted manhood. . . . So it was with a heart full of longing and hope that my father led us to school on that first day. He took long strides in his eagerness, the rest of us running and hopping to keep up. At last the four of us stood around the teacher's desk; and my father, in his impossible English, gave us over in her charge, with some broken word of his hopes for us that his swelling heart could no longer contain. I venture to say that Miss Nixon was struck by something uncommon in the group we made, something outside of . . . the manner of the alien. My little sister was as pretty as a doll, with her clear pink-and-white face, short golden curls, and eyes like blue violets when you caught them looking up. My brother might have been a girl, too, with his . . . rich red color, glossy black hair, and fine eyebrows. Whatever secret fears were in his heart, remembering his former teachers, who had taught with the rod, he stood up straight and uncringing before the American teacher, his cap respectfully doffed. Next to him stood a starved-looking girl with eyes ready to pop out. . . . All three children carried themselves rather better than the common run of ''green" pupils that were brought to Miss Nixon. But the figure that challenged attention to the group was the tall, straight father, with his earnest face and fine forehead, nervous hands eloquent in gesture, and a voice full of feeling. This foreigner, who brought his children to school as if it were [a religious act], who regarded the teacher of the primer class with reverence, who spoke of visions, like a man inspired, in a common schoolroom, was not like other aliens, who brought their children in dull obedience to the law; was not like the native fathers, who brought their unmanageable boys, glad to be relieved of their care. I think Miss Nixon guessed what my father's best English could not convey. I think she [saw] that by the simple act of delivering our school certificates to her he took possession of America. 1 What do you think was the meaning of America to Mary Antin's father? 2 Why did Mary's father believe that education was so important? 3 How would you justify the importance of education? Tlie photographs on this and the following pages give you some evidence about the work immigrants did soon after their arrival in America. Study the photographs and answer these questions. What types of work are being done by the people in these photographs? What kinds of knowledge, experience, and skills were needed to do these jobs? Make a hypothesis about the kinds of jobs open and closed to immigrants w'hen they first arrived in this country. What evidence beyond these photographs would help you confirm or modify your hypothesis? Thousands of newcomers, like Edward Corsi and Mary Antin, were able to survive the terrible conditions of the city and to overcome their disadvantages. I had to learn life over in a brand-new world. And I could not talk. My first desire was for chocolate drops, and I pointed my finger at them. My second was for fishing tackle, and I pointed my finger at a wrapping cord and heaved up an imaginary fish. I used baby talk. "Price?" I asked. And later in the day, "Vatsprice?" Saleswomen answered with motherly grimaces. . . . 1 hoarded words like a coin collector. Every day I found new words, for all the things and acts that I beheld in the New World had a name, and every name had many modifiers. I talked to myself as I had done in the rope spinnery during my childhood—playing with my collection during all my leisure hours. 1 remember distinctly the day when words which had grown familiar to my ear attached themselves to things that had grown familiar to my eye. "Was the boss satisfied?" "This is a rush job." "The whistle blew long ago." "I'll O.K. your time slip." I was less of a child and more grown-up when these words became part of my own living flesh. We had become partners, the New World and 1, for we owned something in common. In Brooklyn I joined a public night school where immigrants gathered to learn the language of their new country. The teacher was a young American woman of wit anti refinement. She handled her forty husky pupils well. There was in the class an old, half-blind Italian doctor who never learned to say "I" instead of "me." There was also an English teamster, with black teeth and clothes that smelled of horses, who was learning a more limber handwriting. And there were many Swedes who after the day's work at the water front were tired and sleeps' and always lost the page in their primers when they were called on to read. My new friend was in a hurry to return. He was tutoring a youngster in mathematics, lie told me. I held him hack. Mathematics! The only language that made natural forces obey its command! The bridge between earth and the stars! The essence of voltage and amperage! He was preparing a youth for entrance examination to Cooper Union on the Bowery. "If 1 took lessons, could I also enter Cooper l nion?" I asked eagerly. "One dollar I'll pay you every week." He looked me over from head to foot—especially my head. "Yes," he said. "I ll teach you." That spring and summer I studied algebra anti geometry with [great] joy and [enthusiasm]. My hooks were always with me. In the morning on the trains from Brooklyn I studied mathematics. And when 1 walked along Broadway from City Hall to the shop on Prince Street I solved [math- ematical problems], often colliding with people on the crowded sidewalk. When I hauled a motor to a sweatshop and the wagon got stuck in a tie-up, I would ponder over circles and triangles. When my foreman forbade me to hurry a repair job and kept me loafing for days at a time in the cellars of Manhattan, my book was under a plumber's candle, ready at a moment's notice to be tossed into my tool bag. Even when I rode on top of an office elevator the day long, repairing the bell wire cable between stops, my book lay hidden in my tool bag. . . . Short circuits blew my screwdriver [apart], my pliers into clouds of smoke, and my wrench into . . . dust. Invisible currents swept through my tissue . . . some hitting me a hammer blow that stunned my senses. But I mastered my trade and my mathematics. One of the reasons so many people found themselves locked within the confines of the city was the fact that the factories of industrial America were located there. It was in the city that the immigrant had his best chance of finding work—usually hard, grueling work that was open to women and children as well as men. The harshness of factory life has been often told. Yet, there are countless examples of immigrants who, forced to take up this means of earning a living, were able to endure these hardships and work to better themselves and their situation. Adapted from Sadie Frowne, "The Story of a Sweatshop Girl. " The Independent, My mother was a tall, handsome woman with red cheeks, large brown eyes, and a great quantity of jet-black hair. She kept a little grocer's shop in the village where we used to live. That was in Poland. She had a wagon in which she used to drive about the country selling her groceries, and sometimes she worked in the fields with my father. . . . When I was ten, my father died. He was a good man and a steady worker, and we never knew what it was to be hungry while lie lived. After he died, troubles began. The rent of our shop was about six dollars a month, and there were food and clothes to provide. We needed little, it is true, but even soup, black bread, and onions we could not always get. We struggled along till 1 was nearly 13. I was quite handy at housework and shopkeeping, but we fell behind in the rent. Mother kept thinking more and more that we should have to leave Poland and go across the sea to America, where we heard it was much easier to make money. Mother wrote to Aunt Fanny, who lived in New York, and told her how hard it was to live in Poland. My aunt went around among our relatives in New York and took up a [collection] for our passage. Mother and 1 came by steerage on a steamship in a very dark place that smelled dreadfully. There were hundreds of other people packed in with us, men, women, and children, and almost all of them were sick. It took us twelve days to cross the sea, and we thought we should die. But at last the voyage was over and we came up and saw the beautiful bay and the big woman with the spikes on her head and the lamp that is lighted at night in her hand. Aunt Fanny and her husband met us at the gate of this country and were very good to us. Soon I had a place to live out (as a domestic servant), while my mother got work in a factory making white goods. I was only a little over 13 and a greenhorn, so I received nine dollars a month and board and lodging, which I thought was doing well. Mother made nine dollars a week. Mother had a very gay disposition. She liked to go around and see everything. Friends took her about New York and she caught a bad cold and coughed and coughed. She tried to keep on working, but it was no use. She had not the strength. Two doctors attended her, but they could do nothing. At last she died and 1 was left alone. I had saved money while out at service, hut Mother's sickness and funeral swept it all away. Now I had to begin all over again. Aunt Fanny bad always been anxious for me to get an education, as I did not know how to read or write, and she thought that was wrong. Schools are different in Poland from what they are in this country , and I was always too busy to learn to read and write. After Mother died I thought I would try to learn a trade, and then i could go to school at night and learn to speak the English language well. So 1 went to work in what is called a sweatshop, making shirts by machine. I was new at the work, and the foreman scolded me a great deal. "Now, then," he would say, "this place is not for you to he looking around in. Attend to your work. That is what you have to do." 1 did not know at first that you must not look around and talk, and 1 made many mistakes with the sewing, so that I was often called a "stupid animal." But I made four dollars a week by working six days in the week. It cost me two dollars a week to live, and 1 had a dollar a week to spend on clothing and pleasure. I saved the other dollar. I went to night school. At first it was hard work learning, as 1 did riot know much English. Two years ago 1 came to Brownsville, where so many of mV people are, and where I have friends. I got work in a factory making underskirts. I am earning five dollars and fifty cents a week now. The factors' is in the third story of a l,rick building. It is in a room twenty feet long and fourteen broad. There are fourteen machines in it. I, and the daughter of the people with whom I live, work two of these machines. The other operators arc all men, some young and some old. One of the young men in the factory is Henry, He is tall and dark, and he has a small mustache. He is pale and much educated, having been to school. He knows a great many things and has some money saved. I think nearly four hundred dollars. He is not going to he in a sweatshop all the time, hut will soon be in the real estate business, for a lawyer that knows him well has promised to open an office and pay him to manage it. Henry has seen me home every night for a long time. He wants me to marry him, hut I am not seventeen yet, and 1 think that is too young. He is only nineteen, so we can wait. I will keep on working in the factory for a time. Of course it is hard, hut I would have to work hard even if I was married. 1 get up at half-past five every morning and make myself a cup of coffee on the oil stove. I eat a Hit of bread and perhaps some fruit and then go to work. I have heard that there is a sort of clock that calls you at the very time you want to get up, hut I can't believe that, because I don't see how the clock would know. Often I get to the factory soon after six o'clock. At seven o'clock we all sit down to our machines and the boss brings to each one the pile of work that he or she is to finish during the day, what they call in English their "stint." This pile is put down beside the machine, and as soon as a skirt is done it is laid on the other side of the machine. Sometimes the work is not all finished by six o'clock, and then the one who is behind must work overtime. Sometimes one is finished ahead of time and gets awayr at four or five o'clock. The machines go like mad all day, because the faster you work the more money you get. Sometimes in my haste I get my finger caught and the needle goes right through it. It goes so quick, though, that it does not hurt much. I bind the finger up with a piece of cotton and go on working. We all have accidents like that. All the time we are working, the boss walks about examining the finished garments. He makes us do them over again if they are not just right. So we have to be careful as well as swift. But I am getting so good at the work that within a year I will be making seven dollars a week, and then I can save at least three dollars and fifty cents a week. I have over two hundred dollars saved now. The machines are all run by foot power, and at the end of the day one feels so weak that there is a great temptation to lie right down and sleep. But you must go out and get air and have some pleasure. So instead of lying down I go out, generally with Henry. Sometimes we go to Coney Island, where there are good dancing places, and sometimes we go to Ulmer Park to picnics. I am very fond of dancing, in fact, of all sorts of pleasure. I go to the theater quite often, and I like those plays that make you cry' a great deal. The Two Orphans is good. I cried all night because of the hard times that the children had in the play. For the last two winters I have been going to night school. [ have learned reading, writing, and arithmetic. I can read quite well in English now, and 1 look at the newspapers every day. I read English books, too, sometimes. I am going back to night school again this winter. Plenty of my friends go there. Some of the women in my class are more than 40 years of age. Like me, they did not have a chance to learn anything in the old country. It is good to have an education; it makes you feel higher. People say now that 1 am clever and fine in conversation. . . . I have many friends and we often have jolly parties. Many of the young men like to talk to me. but I don't go out with any except Henry. Lately he has been urging me more and more to get mar- ried—but I think I'll wait. 1 What examples of the harshness of the factory system do you find in this account? 2 What part do you think Sadie Frownc played in the making of America? Throughout this Unit we have seen materials about European immigrants who came to America. We must not overlook the fact that, although the great majority of newcomers to America were European, a significant number of people from the Orient came to these shores. In a book entitled Chinatown Family, Lin Yutang describes a Chinese family which has been reunited on the wharf m New York. His dark round head, his few thin whiskers, his shining skin, and his swaying motion all contributed to the impression of a seal. Yiko, standing at the other end behind Tom and Eva, putting his hands widespread on the two children's shoulders, seemed to protect his younger brother anti sister under his invisible wings. The mother, a woman of fifty, with a strong, square face, had not yet recovered from her son's strong embrace. "Why it's for the Chinese papers," he replied. Chinatowm was going to see how Frederick, the devoted son, welcomed his mother to the New York shore. It was these moments that counted. The American Indians greeting the Mayflower were the subject of a historic painting. "Sei-lol Sei-lo!" sighed the mother. It was not enough that her son should kiss her but that the disgraceful moment should be published and immortalized! It was against all sense of womanly decency. From that moment there was no peace among the party in the taxi until Daiko said that Yiko could keep the picture from being published and all agreed that he should. This wras about the time they reached the Tom Fong Hand Laundry. . . . Things are never what they seem. The little rathole of a shop on a cross street near the corner of Third Avenue w'as a great disappointment to Tom and Eva and even to the mother. But it was not a rathole. It was a gold mine w'here the father and Daiko had made enough money for them to buy their farm in Sunwei. Tom had had visions of a spic- and-span shop, all American style, crowded w ith hundreds of American customers, all talking the gibberish that was English. . . . The shop was in an old three-story gray house, sandwiched between two red brick four-story buildings. A staircase from the pavement led up to a dark hallway, through a door opened by buzz control. The family's home was on the top floor, consisting of three rooms anti a very spacious kitchen overlooking a yard that was empty but for some clotheslines. The twro children headed for the roof as soon as they discovered there was a staircase leading up to it. On the left were the backs of the houses on Third Avenue. Through a window Tom saw a woman in pink working in a kitchen and in another house, on the fourth floor, a girl was looking out of a window, her chin cupped in her hands resting on the window sill. Nevertheless, the yard gave a feeling of seclusion and peace. Their section of the yard, like the others, was enclosed by faded, discolored board partitions. A scraggy elm in the neighbor's yard on the right managed to breathe through its few branches of leaves. From the roof, Toni could come within a few feet of the leaves, and the roof was all their own. It was good and peaceful, and the sun was shining in the yard, and Tom was content. 1 What attitudes had Frederick adopted in America that were strange to his mother? 2 Why was taking the picture so important to Frederick? The following selection was written by a young Japanese- American whose parents came to America during the great period of Japanese migration to the United States between 1890 and 1924. That winter—1934-35—can't be laughed off easily. "Nothin' chin 7. . . Don 't hire Japs! . . . Sorry, we don't take on any Japanese!... I couldn't use you if you was a white man!. . ."My feet still hurt when I think of all the walking I did up and down the hills of San Francisco. I was really frightened. Didn't I belong here at all? But, ... I was an American! If not, what was I? I was no "Jap"! This was my country. I did belong! . . . Then there were times when my brain and feelings went numb. Occasionally a flash would come through the numbness: I've got to fight this thing out! But I could not shake off the dead mood. . , . One day I registered at a Japanese household employment agency. Then I was sent to place after place, perhaps a dozen in all, till T was finally taken by a couple who lived in a lovely apartment in a building high on the side of a hill, with a superb view of the bay—although, in a way, I took them as much as they took me. I could have been hired at several of the previous places to which I had been sent, but was not because I did not like the people on first impression, and deliberately behaved improperly during the interviews. Now and then, during my first two years with them, they would put me in place, which pushed me to the brink of quitting; but they also made frequent concessions. For example, the previous houseboy had worn a white coat when serving them. I rebelled against this so much they let me have my way, except when they had special guests. Although 1 knew I could not possibly expect anything more, I resented the tentativeness with which they took me—"when we know you better, you may consider yourself a member of our household." I was on probation, ... I decided to develop a tactic toward them. 1 would get from them as many concessions as possible and do my work so they could find no fault. I would be aloof; answer their questions, as far as possible, yes or no. I started in college in the fall of 1935. By then my attitude toward my job u'as formed. ... I told myself the job was a means to an end, and in a way it was a cinch. The cook was an elderly Finnish woman, who had been there for years; she seldom had anything to say outside the line of her work. Very early in my sociology class I came upon the phrase "marginal man," which described me fully. I was neither here nor there; an orphan who was not an orphan, a "Jap" who was not a "Jap," an American w'ho was not really an American. When this occurred to me, I told myself it was funny and laughed, but it also cut into me. I did not know whether I liked the college or not. What 1 noticed, I think, first of all were the "Japanese" and "Chinese" students (I thought of them in quotes) studying in their special corners at their special tables in the library. When I came on the "marginal man" phrase, I labeled them with it, then amused myself tossing them about in my mind, complicatedly, as "Japs" and "Chinks" who were not "Japs" and "Chinks" although some thought they were, as Americans who were not really Americans, and as orphans in relation both to America and Japan or China who did not know they were orphans. . . . A couple of the "Japanese" students tried to approach me, but my manner kept them off. For a while, when I passed their table in the library, some would move as though to make room for me, seeming to take it for granted I belonged among them; but avoiding their eyes, I would pretend not to see them, walk past, and pick a chair in some corner or against some wall, without a table. There I would feel uncomfortable, without letting myself figure out why. Sometimes it was a half-hour before I could concentrate. By-and-by 1 decided T did not like the college any better than I liked my job, but I could not apply quite the same philosophy and policy toward it that I had toward the job. It touched and stirred all sorts of areas in me. Several of the subjects I took interested me. I could not help noticing the students, both individually and as a body; but, afraid they would learn I was a houseboy, I would not risk approaching or being myself with, them. So I lived in a shell, in a state of hidden and futile rebellion against everything, and studied hard. I kept even the professors at arm's length, although one or two of them seemed disposed to talk to me. I had a small but quiet and comfortable room in my employers' apartment, and usually read till one or two in the morning, sleeping four or five hours a night (I had to be up at the ring of the alarm clock at six to attend to my duties as a houseboy). I got excellent grades. By-and-by, however, that ceased to give me any real satisfaction. I never told anyone my grades, lest I be called a bookworm. I was full of ridiculous fears and notions like that, but outwardly, I think, I looked always poised and cool. The first two years everybody on the campus left me alone. Now and then in my room I brooded over the thought that the students—the white students—were purposely steering wide of me, glad I made no effort to get in with them. Only once in a while, riding in cable cars to and from school, getting a beautiful view of the city and the bay I felt momentarily relieved, detached—really quiet and at ease. But there were other things—vague, elusive, ill-defined— which were part of my inner confusion. After taking the houseboy job, my home across the bay at once drew and repelled me. Its drawing power, I suppose, was the fact that, while I was there, it gave me a sense of being wanted. And it drove me away from it by the threat of uneasiness and pain it caused me every time I visited it. 1 saw there other aspects of the same thing that was troubling and confusing me. That overcrowded room in back of the barbershop was a cultural battleground, and the battle—Asia versus America—was a sordid business, which, I thought then, could resolve itself into nothing worthwhile. . . . The second or third week of my junior year, a fellow whom I had seen around the previous two years and who was a newly elected student officer stopped me on the campus and swung his hand over my shoulder with a great show of belligerency, then laughed—rather foolishly I thought at the moment. 1 was a very superior and well-contained person, and he seemed to me mildly idiotic as he stood there before me; but, instead of continuing on my way, 1 deigned to ask him, "What's the idea?" lie was a head taller than I, and, looking down at me and grinning, he said he had tried to knock the chip off my shoulder. I knew what he meant instantly, but, feeling of a sudden simultaneously foolish and miserable, asked him anyhow. "The chip," he roared. "The . . . thing's big as a log! A bunch of us have been noticing it the last two years, and personally I don't know how you stand it. . . . What I'm drivin' at is that I think you're a dope." I said, "Is that so?"—or, rather, "Zatso?" as I used to say it in the orphanage. "Yeah, zatso!" said he. "I wanna talk to you." And he launched into me, the while I looked at the green grass at my feet. What kinda . . . lug was I, anyhow! Was 1 a student in this college or wasn't I? Why wasn't I myself? Why . . . didn't I do somethin'—join clubs, play intramural sports, go to games, take an active hand in the student-body affairs? . . . "Come on, what do you say?" He stuck out his paw. I could not help taking his hand, and suddenly all my resentment went; I felt incredibly alive. In May [1939] I graduated, and I cannot summon sufficient modesty to refrain from adding "with the highest honors in my class." Partly to provide further documentation for my idea that the non-Oriental Americans, or at least some (the best) of them, were ready to meet and mingle with us Oriental Americans, I got together a party of Japanese American fellows and girls, including my two oldest sisters, and took them to the large downtown hotel where the Graduation Ball was held. The girls of our group made a hit. While wearing regular evening gowns, they had accented their Oriental looks for the occasion, and all my non-Oriental friends were asking for introductions so they could dance with them. The dean of the college said it was the first time any "Japanese" had come to one of the big dances of the college, and he was pleasantly surprised. What I am saying, 1 realize, may be little more than surface assurance, whistling in the dark. The mere fact that I mention these things reveals my uneasiness over the situation in which we find ourselves. The fact, however, is that throughout the dance we all had a very good time, and I see no reason why other Japanese Americans cannot do what we did. Our participation in the affair suggests a method of progress. Usually, when nisei [children of Japanese immigrants] go to school dances, they stick together and dance mostly with one another. Of course, everywhere things will not work out as well as they did with us in San Francisco, where Orientals and Oriental Americans are allowed to enter and dine and dance in nearly all the better hotels, restaurants and night clubs; it is mostly the lower-tvpe places that have discriminatory rules against them. Elsewhere, you might be barred; but there is nothing like trying. If you don't try, you are licked right there; licked so bad you don't even know you are licked. 1 Wliat challenges did the young man have to face in America? 2 What do you think he meant by the last sentence in the selection? Have you seen similar statements in this Unit made by other newcomers to America? Explain. Thus far you have read about immigrants who, in one way or another, had many of their dreams answered in America. Not all were so fortunate. Many found the problems connected with their new environment too much to bear. What must be stressed, however, is that by facing these challenges and by illustrating the tremendous problems of the immigrant and of urban conditions, even those who had their dreams frustrated played an important role in the making of America. In the account which follows, a young Russian immigrant described her reaction to America. Silently, we followed my father back into the hut from which the Cossack [soldier-horseman in the Czar's military guard] had driven us a while before. We children looked from mother to father and from father to mother. "Good Lord, the czar himself is pushing us to America." My mother's face lighted up the hut like a lamp. "Foolish people," admonished my father. "Always your head in the air. What—where—America? With what money? Can dead people lift themselves up to dance?" "Dance?" The samovar and the brass pots reechoed my mother's laughter. "1 could dance myself over the waves of the ocean to America." io i- in i - i~- in t~ Adapted from Anzia Yezierska, Hungry Hearts (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company). Copyright 1920 and 1948 by Anzia Yezierska. 1975 1575 at the blank wall of the next house. "Good Lord! Like in a grave so dark!" . . . "It ain't so dark; it's only a little shady," said Gc..alyah Mindel, and lighted the gas. "Look only!"—he pointed with pride to the dim gaslight—"No candles, no kerosene lamps, in America. You turn on a screw, and put to it a match, and you got it light like with sunshine." Again the shadow fell over me, again the doubt of America. In America were rooms without sunlight; rooms to sleep in, to eat in, to cook in, but without sunshine, and Gedalyah Mindel was happy. Could I be satisfied with just a place to sleep in and eat in, and a door to shut people out, to take the place of sunlight? Or would I always need the sunlight to be happy? And where was there a place in America for me to play? 1 looked out into the alley below, and saw pale-faced children scrambling in the gutter. "Where is America?" cried my heart. 1 What hopes did the writer have in coming to America? 2 How do you think she and her famib could have overcome their disappointment in what they found in America? Some people have come to the United States from nations close by, such as Mexico. The account below was written by a Mexican girl whose family came to the United States in the 1940s. ic i- <c in i- io i- 1(5 Adapted from Beatrice Winston Griffith. American Me (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1948). Beprinted by permission. We go every July from Los Angeles to pick the fruits in the summer hills of Hanford. We lived in tents and would get up early in the grey morning when it was cold. Then we all ate outdoors over a little fire. Everybody getting up from their tents and talking and calling to each other and cooking the beans. Then we go to work and stand on our feet from seven in the morning until six at night. Gee, man, I would get so tired. You know, in the fruits you dream, sleep, walk, breathe, and talk apricots—yellow and big and soft all around you. You pick 'em, you dump 'em, you squash 'em, you peel 'em, you cut 'em, you count 'em. Everything is apricots. How many you pick? How many you peel? How much buckets or trays? Always it is to eat and smell apricots. . . . This day I tell you the boss came and paid the checks. Man, it was great. To all the working people and kids he paid them. My father and mother and me and my brother gots a hundred dollars for working three weeks, would you believe it? When 1 saw that check I told my mother she was fooling. But she said it was real money. . . . She said that in that eheck was a couch that made a bed at night for my father and brother . . . clothes for my brother and my father, and in it was a car. Would you believe it? A little broken car was in that check? . . . Oh, I tell you, all was happy that night for getting money and lots clothes and food and stuff in that check. . . . My cousin Ramon from Hanford has a little truck that's green and cute named Benito, that will take us to town. To get to this truck and Ramon, Mokey, and me walk through the fields to the long dusty road. . . . Inside the truck . . . was lots kids already. Everybody was happy and singing. . . . All the kids sit tight in the truck cause it goes to pieces lots of times and the sides all fall down. You always hit hard when you drive cause the tires go flat sometimes. Then Ram6n and the boys stuff rags into the tires when they go flat so we ride lots of hitting together. Adelita was there too, with ribbons and braids done up on her head like she wras going for a dance. Manuel he's my cousin . . , brings his good guitar to sing some ranehero songs. . . . All sing "Soldatos Razos," and are happy for smiling and yelling cause all are happy for living, 1 guess. When we come onto the long highway that goes to Han- ford this night I tell you about, two policemen in their white car stopped the truck because they see us Mexicans inside. But my cousin Ramon, who's been to high school and who is smart knowing all about maps and what means a filibuster and the United States Congress, says to that cop, "This is a free country, ain't it? We can sing in this little truck if we want can't we? Who says Mexicans can't sing for breaking the law in this truck doesn't know his country." So the cops, seeing my cousin was smart said, "Oh, wise guy, huh? Okay, let's see your draft cards. All of you." But only my cousin had a card from the draft, only he was eighteen. The cops look hard at his draft card and then tells us, "Okay, ... go on." . . . The group arrives in town at the carnival and buys tickets to ride the little automobiles. We all piled in the cars, red, green, yellow—all the ears that was empty gots full. . . . Then the race began. My heart was pumping up and down like some jumping beans. I got scared bumping so many cars and my heart went black and my ears go clank clank, but it was fun. Danny banged my car, Mokey bit him, then Manuel and Adelita and Ramon and Rosie all was banging cars and yelling. Everybody got bumped, nobody got hurt, and the music was loud like iu the circus. [An] American kid bumped Mokey and laughed, and Mokey bumped him hack. Then they was bumping, laughing and pushing, each car a little faster and a little harder. Pretty soon then the American guy looked away, arid Mokey gave him a hard bump. Then they was getting mad for reals. The American kid called him, "Dirty Mexican, I'll fix you!" Mokey tell him, "Who do you think you are, calling me dirty Mexican?" The guy banged him hard and say, "Well, I'm me American me. That's who I am!" So Mokey banged him hard on the head . . . and [yelled at] him, "Yeah? Well I'm American me too. American inside, but Mexican on top!" 1 What challenges did the young girl in this account face in America? 2 What did Mokey mean by the statement, "Well I'm American me too. American inside, but Mexican on top?" At the beginning of this Part we stated that America was a nation of immigrants. This statement is as true today as it was in the earlier periods we have examined throughout this Unit. Migration in this country today includes not only people coining to our shores from foreign lands, hut also the movement of thousands of people within our borders. For these people, the reasons for moving, the hopes and dreams, and the challenges they are forced to face are in many ways similar to those of the people we have been studying. Most significant of these new immigrants have been the millions of blacks who have moved from the South to the urban centers of the North. "The Black Immigrants,"The Saturday Evening Post, July 15, 1967. f 1967 by The Curtis Publishing Company. Reprinted by pemission. At 6:40 on the evening of March 4, 1967, Walter Austin, who had lived for almost half a century within 60 miles of the Mississippi, actually saw the river for the first time. Still wearing his four-dollar overalls, he was sitting in the back seat of an automobile, jammed in with four other members of his family, crossing a high bridge. His eyes were red with the fatigue of the last 38 sleepless hours. But he stared flown through the dusk at the aluminum reflection of the greatest body of water he had ever seen, and he said the same thing that rose out of him earlier when someone told him that in New York City there is a building 102 stories high: a low, slow, "Good gracious!" The car moved across the bridge, its occupants turning to keep in sight the massive river that had been the source of life and of suffering for five generations of Austin families. And then the river was gone, and they turned forward again to look uncertainly into the darkness ahead. It was the most momentous crossing of their lives. From that time on their experiences would be like nothing they or their ancestors had ever known. That morning they had just been another impoverished Negro family working the fields on a remote Mississippi plantation. But at noon, with hardly a backward glance, they had slammed the doors of the two cars driven by a relative and a friend and headed north for a new life in the city. They carried all they could from the last hog they would ever butcher—the salted jaw, a slab of salt pork, two hams, 100 pounds of lard—stashed in the car like sacred objects. Riding with them as well was a new and confusing collection of hopes and fears. That day the Austins—father, mother, five children aged 17 to 6, and one grandchild—added their eight lives to a flow of Americans that is one of the great unsung [stories] of human history. It is an uprooting of more people in a shorter period of time than almost any peacetime migration known to man, a vast transfer that is changing America. . . . One thing all Americans share is a background of migration. The American Indians were immigrants, probably from Asia; the forebears of most white Americans came from Europe in the largest intercontinental human movement in history; the ancestors of most American Negroes were the 400. 000 Africans brought into the South as slaves between 1619 and 1808. Now the descendants of these Negro immigrants arc making another mass move, this time within the United States. In this generation, some four million Negroes have left the South, most of them for six states: California, Illinois, Michigan, New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania, Where 50 years ago three quarters of Negro Americans were in rural areas, today three quarters are in cities. And the tide still runs strong. In 1960 there were four American cities that were 40 percent Negro; by 1970 there will be 14, and practically every city of any size will have a core of migrant Negroes, piling up, desperate. Like previous migrants, they are truly aliens, used to different customs, a different climate, essentially a different language, different everything. Their r ettos are countries within countries, in which nearly every 1,1 'abitant feels foreign to what surrounds him. Rut what grounds the city Negroes is more hostile than anything any lte alien has ever encountered. For them the ghetto pe- n,If!ters arc closed as tightly as foreign horders. . . . , e cars went into the foggy night toward Springfield, 111., a doming instinct that affects almost every migrant. It vill COrnrnon during the foreign immigrations to have whole ges from Sicily, Russia, Poland, Germany, Ireland—he Ptanted to some particular American city. The Tiie Austins had a small start. Four days later they found a pinched five-room flat for $65, where the whole family sleeps in just three beds and the beds are the only furniture in the place. The day after that, Walter Austin, got a job that his son Jimmy Lee first had when he moved —mopping floors and washing dishes in a restaurant at $40 a week. His 17-year-old daughter earns $5 more than he does. The Austins are in real need. They require medical attention, furniture, city clothes, and Walter Austin needs a job that will buy these things. But in some ways they are luckier than many migrants. For one thing, almost by chance, they followed the newer, less hopeless migratory routes from the rural South—more and more to the West and more and more to the medium-size cities. In the smaller cities the rate of growth is often better than in the huge ones, the Negro districts are distinct but lack the oppressiveness of square miles of squalor, and in a smaller community it is easier to match available men with available jobs. Walter Austin had just left Merigold, Miss., which has a population of 602. When he heard that his new home, Springfield, had 86,000 people, of whom 5,000 are Negroes he opened his eyes wide and said, "Good gracious!" In Chicago there are a million Negroes. 1 In wliat ways can you compare the Austins with the immigrant families we have been studying? 2 Can you name any other large groups of American immigrants today? In Part 2 of this Unit we have seen that our recent forefathers were as much a part of the making of America as were our colonial founding fathers. Read the list below. It contains the names of various fields of endeavor, all important to the making of America. Your task is to select one or more of these fields of endeavor and then to find out as much as you can about one twentieth-century American who made important contributions to that field. Make sure that you find out the nationality or ethnic background of each person you select. In this way you and your classmates will actually be writing the concluding section of this Unit, You will be gathering additional evidence in your search for answers to the question: Who made America? Politics Science and Technology Rusincss and l.abnr Sports Entertainment Education Religion Literature and Art same thing now happens within the country. There are counties in West Virginia from which most departing people go to Cincinnati, others from which they go to Cleveland. In Chicago there are two blocks made up largely of Holmes County Mississippians. The compass of the migrating poor is seldom fixed by a job already arranged and waiting, but by the presence of close relatives and friends. . . . Like an endless chain, whole tribes go link by link to some city where a base has been established. When the crisis came to Walter Austin, there was never any doubt where he would go, and when he got there, there were suddenly a total of 36 Austins within a scant half mile. It was a scene of joy and relief, at 2 o'clock on a Sunday morning, when the two cars finally arrived at their destination, and the Austins of Merigold, Miss., became the Austins of Springfield, 111., sharecroppers no longer but city dwellers now. Standing wearily on the sidewalk, they looked up with awe at Jimmy Lee's house, a neat, white clapboard with five spacious rooms and its own bathtub and toilet. Waiting inside were the older daughters who had come North earlier, and they helped sort the newcomers and send them to nearby homes to sleep the remaining hours of the night. That day Walter Austin's family made the rounds of the relatives' homes. At Walter's sister's there were guitars, singing, and joshing. The older women put on their wigs and urged Frances to try one. Bashfully, she put one on and imitated the modeling she had seen on television. Suddenly she was changed. One moment she was the shy country girl, the next a poised young woman. She lifted off the wig and said quietly, "I'm going to get one." The next morning Jimmy Lee's wife took Frances with her to Kennedy's Laundry and introduced her to the boss, George Boehmer. He said, "I like to hire Mississippi people. They're good workers." So 29 hours after her arrival in the city, Frances Austin, working beside white women, was feeding flatwork into a presser and earning more than her father ever did in his 41 years of labor. That same morning Mrs. Austin and her older daughter went out looking for a flat. In Jimmy Lee's house there were seven preschool children, crying, running, fighting, all tended by a new baby sitter, Walter Austin. He was no longer in overalls. Someone had lent him a white shirt, a pair of slacks and a too-large suit jacket. He stood in the middle of the kitchen with an open carton of milk. He cried out, "Hush, child," to one girl, and tried to restrain another one who was pounding a nail file into the linoleum with a hairbrush. "Soon as they find a place for us to stay, I'm hoping to find a job. Some kind of a job." Then, milk carton still in hand, he looked with bewilderment at the children. "This is one job I do not like." and intellectual welfare of the craft by the following means: 1. By [freely] furnishing employment. 2. By mutual [financial] aid in case of strikes and lockouts, sickness and death. 3. By advancing money for traveling. 4. By defending members involved in legal difficulties [which are connected with] their official duties to the union. 5. By the issuing of a trade journal defending the interests of the union of the trade. 6. By using all honorable means to effect a national federation of trade unions. 7. By prevailing upon the Legislature to secure, first the prohibition of child labor under fourteen years of age; the establishment of a normal day's labor to consist of not more than eight hours per day for all classes; the abolition of . . . tenement house cigar manufacture, and the system of letting out by contract the convict labor in prisons and reformatory institutions; the legalization of trade unions and the establishment of bureaus of labor statistics. 1 According to the preamble, why should workers organize? 2 What does the document say about the action of the government toward unions? What does it say has been the reason for this action? in {5 oo in in in 05 oo s 05 i a Adapted from Anatanas Kaz- tauskis, "From Lithuania to the Chicago Stockyards," The Independent, LVII (1904). .4 Union Member Speaks Many individuals benefited directly from union membership despite the limited success of organized labor during the Gilded Age. In the reading below, an immigrant from Lithuania described his early experiences with industry and unions. Soon after my arrival in. this country, l knew that money was everything I needed. My money was almost gone and I thought that I would soon die unless I got a job, for this was not like home. Here money was everything and a man without money must die. One morning my friends woke me up at five o'clock and said, "Now if you want life, liberty and happiness," they laughed, "you must push for yourself. You must get a job. Come with us." And we went to the yards. Men and women were walking in by thousands as far as we could see. We went to the doors of one big slaughter house. There was a crowd of about 200 men waiting there for a job. They looked hungry and kept watching the door. At last a special policeman came out and began pointing to men, one by one. Each one jumped forward. Twenty-three were taken. Then they all went inside and all the others turned their faces away and looked tired. I remember one boy sat down and cried, just next to me, on a pile of boards. Some policemen waved their clubs and we all walked on. I found some Lithuanians to talk with, who told me they had come every morning for three weeks. Soon we met other crowds coming away from other slaughter houses, and we all walked around and felt bad and tired and hungry. That night 1 told my friends that I would not do this many days, but would go some place else. "Where?" they asked me, and I began to see then that I was in bad trouble, because I spoke no English. Then one man told me to give him $5 to give the special policeman. I did this and the next morning the policeman pointed me out, so I had a job. 1 have heard some big talk since then about my American freedom of contract, but I do not think I had much freedom in bargaining for this job with the Meat Trust. My job was in the cattle killing room. I pushed the blood along the gutter. Some people think these jobs make men bad. I do not think so. The men who do the killing are not as bad as the ladies with fine clothes who come every day to look at it, because they have to do it. The cattle do not suffer. They are knocked senseless with a big hammer and are dead before they wake up. This is done not to spare them pain, but because if they got hot and sweating with fear and pain the meal would not be so good. I soon saw that every job in the room was done like this—so as to save everything and make money. One Lithuanian, who worked with me, said, "They get all the blood out of these cattle and all the work out of us men." This was true, for we worked that first day from six in the morning till seven at night. The next day we worked from six in the morning till eight at night. The next day we had no work. So we had no good, regular hours. It was hot in the room that summer, and the hot blood made it worse. I held this job six weeks and then I was turned off. I think some other man had paid for my job, or perhaps I was too slow. The foreman in that room wanted quick men to make the work rush, because he was paid more if the work was done cheaper and quicker. I saw now that every man was helping himself, always trying to get all the money he could.. .. Those were bad days and nights. At last I had a chance to help myself. Summer was over and Election Day was coming, The Republican boss in our district, Jonidas, was a saloonkeeper. A friend took me there. Jonidas shook hands and treated me fine. He taught me to sign my name, and the next week I went with him to an office and signed some paper, and then I could vote. I voted as I was told, and then they got me back into the yards to work, because one big politician owns stock in one of those houses. Then I felt that I was getting in beside the game. I was in a combine like other sharp men. Even when work was slack I was all right because they got me a job in the street cleaning department, . . . All of us w'ere telling our friends to come soon. Soon they came—even thousands. The employers in the sard liked this because those sharp foremen are inventing new machines and the work is easier to learn, and so these slow Lithuanians and even green girls can learn to do it, and then the Americans and Germans and Irish are put out and the employer saves money, because Lithuanians work cheaper. This was why the American labor unions began to organize us . . . as they had organized the Bohemians and Poles before us. Well, we were glad to be organized. We had learned that in Chicago every man must push himself always, and Jon- idas had taught us how much better we could push ourselws by getting into a combine. Now, we saw that this union was the best combine for us, because it was the only combine that could say, "It is our business to raise your wages." . . . One night. . , Jonidas saw his chance and took the chair. He talked very fine and we elected him President. We made him Treasurer, too. Down in the saloon lie gave us free drinks and told us we must break away from the Irish grafters. The next week he made us strike, all by himself. We met twice a day in his saloon and spent all of our money on drinks anti then the strike was over. I got out of this union after that. I had been working hard in the cattle killing room and I had a better job. 1 was called a cattle butcher now and I joined the Cattle Butchers' Union. This union is honest and it has done me a great deal of good. It has raised my wages. The man who worked at my job before the union came was getting through the year an average of $9 a week. 1 am getting SI 1. In my first job I got $5 a week. The man who works there now gets $5.75. It lias given me more time to learn to read and speak and enjoy life like an American. I never work now from 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. and then be idle the next day. I work now from 7 A.M. to 5:30 P.M., and there are not so many idle days. The work is evened up. With more time and more money I live much better and I am very happy. ... So is my wife, Alexandria. She came a year ago and has learned to speak English already. . . . We have four nice rooms, which she keeps very clean, and she has flowers growing in boxes in the two front windows. We do not go much to church because the church seems to he too slow. But we belong to a Lithuanian society that gives two picnics in summer and two big balls in winter, where we have a fine time. 1 go one night a week to the Lithuanian Concertina Club. On Sundays we go on the trolley and out into the country. But we like to stay at home more now because we have a baby. When he grows up I will not send him to the Lithuanian Catholic school. They have only two bad rooms and two priests, who teach only in Lithuanian from prayer books. I will send him to the American school, which is very big anil good. The teachers there are Americans and they belong to the Teachers' Labor Union, which has three thousand teachers and belongs to our Chicago Federation of Labor. I am sure that such teachers will give him a good chance. Our union sent a committee to Springfield last year and they passed a law which prevents hoys and girls below sixteen from working in the stockyards. We are trying to make the employers pay on Saturday night in cash. Now they pay in checks and the men have to get money the same night to buy things for Sunday, and the saloons cash checks by thousands. You have to take one drink to have the check cashed. It is hard to take one drink. The union is doing another good thing. It is combining all the nationalities. The night I joined the Cattle Butchers' Union 1 was led into the room by a Negro member. With me were Bohemians, Germans, and Poles, and Mike Donnelly, the President, is an Irishman. He spoke to us in English and then three interpreters told us what he said. We swore to be loyal to our union above everything else except the country, the city, and the state—to be faithful to each other—to protect the women workers—to do our best to understand the history of the labor movement, and to do all we could to help it on. Since then 1 have gone there every two weeks and I help the movement by being an interpreter for the other Lithuanians who come in. That is why I have learned to speak and write good English. The others do not need me long. They soon learn English, too, and when they have done that they are quickly becoming Americans. But the best thing the union does is to make me feel more independent. 1 do not have to pay to get a job and I cannot be discharged unless 1 am no good. For almost the whole 30.000 men and women are organized now in some of our unions and they all are directed by our central council. No man knows what it means to be sure of his job unless he is fired like I was once without any reason being given. So this is why I joined the labor union. There arc many better stories than mine, for my story is very common, There are thousands of immigrants like me. Over 300,000 immigrants have been organized in the last three years by the American Federation of Labor. The immigrants are glad to be organized if the leaders are as honest as Mike Donnelly is. You must get money to live well, and to get money you must combine. 1 cannot bargain alone with the Meat Trust, I tried it and it does not work. There- is no central heating, no plumbing. Water comes from a well several miles away. In winter, in the cold, snowy Appalachian winter, a fireplace provides heat, and eleven bodies leave their five beds to huddle near the burning coals, In summer, flies and mosquitoes are undeterred by screens —and a nearby stream has been badly polluted by a strip- mine. Yet they all try hard as a family. They sleep close together, rely on one another impressively, and keep a very neat home. . . . The teacher is distant kin of theirs and would like to give them all even more, but cannot: "No sir, none of the children get their lunch at school. No sir, they don't. It's up to the principal, who gets the lunches and who doesn't. The well-off kids from town, they bring their money and so they get fed. It don't mean nothin' to their parents, a few dollars here or there. But I can't give each of the kitls a quarter every day. 1 don't have it; I don't have one quarter, never mind six of them. So, they just sit there, while the others eat. And they're not the only ones, at least I know that. Sometimes a kid will offer them something he doesn't want to eat, and sometimes my kids are too proud to accept, but sometimes they swallow their pride to get some of that soup they have." That is the way it is, not only for that one family but for families up and down the hollows in several states of these United States. Respectfully, solemnly one listens, hears the stories, sees evidence of and feels the bravery and courage and honesty and dignity. But one also has to notice the wear and tear on body, mind, and spirit, that goes with hunger and idleness; and one has to notice the illnesses that are never treated, the feet that lack shoes, and most painful of all, the children. On m\ most recent visit, late this summer, I asked a little girl of seven what she'd wish to be if she were given a wish: "Well, I don't know," she answered. Then she had a thought: "Maybe a beaver." I didn't have the nerve to ask her why, but her mother wanted to know, and asked. "A beaver, child?" For a second or two there was silence, and then the answer came, cheerfully spoken: "Well, they have a good time. They can chew all day long on trees, like they was bubblegum, anti they always get to eat, and they can stop by a stream and drink from it anytime they want." The Mexican American.y Next to the American Indians, the Mexican Americans have the oldest history in America. The ancestors of the Mexican Americans were Spaniards or members of Indian tribes who later married Spaniards. Many of the Mexican-Amcrican people came to call themselves La Ha/,a—Spanish for "the race." Many were living on that land which the United States conquered in 1S48 in the Mexican War. Today, most Mexican Americans live in southwestern United States. Many are migrant workers who move from place to place in search of work harvesting crops. However, most have moved to cities where they live in Mexican neighborhoods called barrios. Nearly all Mexican Americans have been forced to endure poor housing conditions and low-paying jobs in America. Mexican-American spokesmen and activists arc determined to lead their people in a struggle for equal rights and opportunities. One of the most articulate is Rodolfo Gonzales, a multi-talented young man. Gonzales, a former boxing champion, is an outspoken political leader of the Mexican Americans. These lines are from his poem "I Am Joaquin." From Rodolfo Gonzales. "I Am Joaquin." I am Joaquin Lost in a world of confusion. Caught up in a whirl of Anglo society. Confused by the rules. Scorned by the attitudes Suppressed by manipulations, and destroyed by modern life. And now! I must choose Between the paradox of Victory of the spirit despite physical hunger Or to exist in the grasp of American social neurosis, sterilization of the soul and a full stomach. 1 am Joaquin in a country that has wiped out all my history, stifled all my pride. My knees are caked with mud. My hands callnsed from the hoe. I have made the Anglo rich. Here I stand Poor in money Arrogant with pride. o w ! - Abridged from pp. 17-19, 22-24 in La Raza: The Mexican Americans by Stan Steiner. lie printed by permission of Hartier & Row, Publishers, Inc. and Harold Matson Company, Inc. In li is book La Raza: The .Mexican Americans, Stan Steiner gives a sense of the desperate poverty and explosive tensions among Mexican Americans in one area of the American Southwest. The village of Antonchico is still. Not a goat goes out in the midday sun; it is too hot. Not a man walks on the street. The buzz of the flies and the whine of the supersonic jets are the only sounds in the white sky. Six men squat in the dust of the village. The) talk, in whispers, of violent deeds that they intend to do to defend their ancestral lands and their manhood. They talk of murder. They talk, but not a man shifts an inch from his squat in the shadow of the adobe house. "We are men of silent violence," says a farmer. On a lazy old mare a young boy rides down the main street, the only street, of the village. The boy on the horse rides by in slow motion, as though he is asleep. The houses hide from the blazing sun. Even the gossiping women are sequestered behind the thick walls of adobe, for it is the time of siesta, and it is uncivilized to w'ork, or walk, or talk loudly at the noon hour. A priest squats in the dust beside the villagers. He is wearing an open shirt and dirty Western chinos. He balances himself expertly, so that the seat of his trousers is poised safely above the prickly sagebrush. "It is so peaceful," I say to the priest. "So is a volcano," he replies. He is a hothead, this priest, so they say. I scoff at his intense words, but he merely smiles and says, "Do not be fooled by the silence." The old farmer who squats beside us listens to our talk, but pretends not to hear. His eyes are alert as a small bird's and his face is innocent. "He is peaceful," I say to the priest. "In the village they say he has killed two men," the priest says matter-of-factlv. The old man gazes into my eyes with a kindly and distant look. He says nothing. "Who did he kill?" I ask skeptically. The priest whispers, "It is what they say. Some men tried to kill him. He killed two of them. Who knows?" A young farmer who has heard this looks up. He breaks a twig in his hand and he jabs the broken ends into the earth, hard. "That is the way it is here," he says, then is silent once more. "In the night I hear a rifle shot," the young farmer says, after a pause. He is answering a question no one has asked him. "And then there is this telephone call. A man says, 'If you don't watch your step we will kill your son.' He hangs up and they cut the telephone wire. My wife, she is fright- cried." His face is troubled by the memory. "That is how it is here." "They cut my fences. And they steal two of my cows," says another farmer. He smiles with tight lips. "If they come again, I kill them." A boy who has been silent among his elders—he is a student working in the village during the summer—says very seriously, "If it were up to me I would go to them with a gun and kill them. Probably I would do that." Who are they? None of the villagers will say. "I do not say who," says a third farmer... "But I tell you this," and his words are hard. "The Spanish people are angry now. Now all the Spanish people have a good rifle. I visit many villages and I tell you this. Everyone has a rifle now." The old man among them speaks. He speaks in quiet Spanish that cannot be translated. What he says is something like this: They have taken our land and stolen it. They have taken our crops and stolen them. They have taken our manhood, and broken it. They have taken our Spanish language, and dirtied it. They have taken our children into their schools, and made them rude. "We have been under the feets of so many of the stran- ger," the old man says in English. "The stranger?" I ask. "Yes," he says, "the stranger who came from the East. Who took our land. Who pushes us around. They have done dirty things to the people of these villages. They did it to my ancestors. They keep on doing it to me. And they think that they are going to do it to my sons and grandsons, but they have another think coming. I tell you they will fight." . . . Some of the villagers are starving. In the adobe huts the old people sit in the dark, with no electricity, no water, no food, waiting for "the welfare." Half of the families do not earn enough to reach the government-approved "poverty line." The farmers often work as migrants on the farms of the "strangers," for the village has lost more than two-thirds of its ancestral land to these "strangers." Many who own land do not farm at all. They are too poor to buy tractors or seed, They, too, are hungry. It is the crudest irony to starve in farm country. . . . Unemployment in the rural villages is so much an accepted fact of life that it often goes unreported. One school nurse in Sandoval County tells of visiting the poor family of a schoolchild in a rural village who had hung a sign on the door of their house that simply said: "We live in a conspiracy of silence," says Fecundo Valdez. He is a rural organizer in the mountain villages of New Mexico. One of that new breed of university graduates, wearing a Pancho Villa mustache and a dashing sombrero on whose brim he has pinned a "Grapes of Wrath" button, Valdez travels the dirt roads to the hidden villages, for the agencies of the government and the universities, lie comes from such a village himself. "The people have a distaste, an anger, a hostility, to the things that have been done to them. But they say little," he says. "In the past these villages were not allowed to participate in real decision making. So they withdrew into their own circles, into silence. If you don't have the means to actively resist what is done to you, then what happens is that you become passively aggressive. It is a basic resistance. It may be dormant, it may be apathetic, but it may be harnessed. Some of the most persistent pleas and demands for change continue to come from members of minority groups in America. Indians. blacks, Mexican Americans—all have stated that what is needed most in this country are policies and actions which make it possible for members of their minority groups to partiepate more fully and equally in American government and life. "I was one of the first Chicanos to run for office/' Manuel Chavez said. We were drinking coffee in the rear of his drugstore. He is a native of Mexico and a graduate of the University of Texas. When he bought the drugstore from two Anglo women in 1962 he was welcomed by the Anglo community as a local entrepreneur—he even was asked to join the Rotary Club—but in 1963 his sympathies were openly for the Chicanos and he ran unsuccessfully as their candidate for councilman. He ran again in 1965 and won. "I lost 80 percent of my business in two months," he said. "They just pulled that red carpet right out from under me. I went broke. Only to this day I don't think they realize I went broke. I pulled in my hiring. I cut my expenses to the bone, I weathered it, and then little by little the Chicanos started trading u'ith me. This had been an Anglo store. They didn't all beat a path to my door, but they gradually trickled in and before you know it I've got enough to make expenses, and last year was the first year that I made as much money as I could have made working for somebody else. It was a four- year fight. "Bitter? Not by a long shot. A little cynical, perhaps, but not bitter. The people here are the ones who have suffered for a long, long time. They don't have too much to show for it even now. But the big gain is intangible. A frame of mind. The Cliicano's approach to things is different from what it used to be. His behavior at work, w hat he expects from his boss and his job, is very much different. At school he is expecting and demanding a lot of things that were his rights to begin with and he never had. It is one thing to lose rights; then you know what you lost and you fight. But when you never knew you had rights, like the Chicano that come here long time ago to work in the fields, it take a long time to know you must fight. Look at the graduating-class pictures five years ago and this year. The dropout rate of Chicano children is reversed. More are staying in school. That is our big victory'. It is pride, man, pride. "1 was lucky. My mother gave me a shove a long time ago. She wanted me to get into the mainstream. Get in the Boy Scouts, she said. Go to school. You are poor but you be something one day. But when you are stooping out in that sun half the year, how you going to know' such things? 