Why did they leave the comparative comforts of Europe to hack out a living in a hostile wilderness? There were two primary reasons, reasons that still ring true today. The New World of North America offered freedom and opportunity, rare qualities in seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth century Europe. In America, the European could find a just government, an ever-expanding democracy, and, of great importance, the right to worship as he pleased without persecution or interference. He could also find opportunity to hotter himself. He had the right to enjoy the fruits of his own labor, to work where he wanted, and in whatever field he chose. He was limited only by his own abilities, not by the maze of [restrictions and customs which inhibited individual advancement in much of Europe. And only in America did he have the opportunity to own his ow n land, to have his own stake in the country. The Great Migration. The free and tempting opportunities of America caused the greatest mass migration in history. After the new nation established a representative government based on a flexible, written Constitution — today the oldest in the world — peoples from every European country and from every continent began to flock to its shores. The greatest number of immigrants came during the hundred years between 1830 and 1930. Germans, Irish, and Italians came by the millions, but hundreds of thousands of others — Russians, Scandinavians, Greeks, Poles, peoples from central, southern, and eastern Europe — also joined the great migration. Eventually, every nationality was represented. Asians were also included in large numbers. Like the peoples from Europe and Africa, they too came to play an important role in American life. In fact in one state — Hawaii — Polynesians arrived more than 1 500 years before the founding of Jamestowm and Plymouth. In die late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, thousands of Chinese, Japanese, and Filipinos joined the American scene. The magnificent interior of Touro Synagogue in Newport, Rhode Island, was completed in 1763. The congregation was founded in 1658. The lands south of the American border contributed many thousands more. Latin Americans — people of European or European-In- dian descent — especially Puerto Ricans and Mexicans — are scattered throughout the country. Since 1917, Puerto Ricans have been United States citizens by birth, whether they were born on their own tropical island or on the mainland. Only one group of Americans did not come to the United States by choice — the Negroes. Europeans and white Americans brought the Negro from Africa (or from the islands of the Caribbean where the Spanish and English had taken him) to help solve the constant demand for a stable labor supply. But the idea of human bondage was so alien to the American creed — the inalienable truth that "all men are created equal" — that even in colonial days there developed an ever-increasing demand that the Negro in America should be free, and that others in Africa should not be transported across the Atlantic against their will. So rapidly did these convictions assert themselves © John T. Hopj The Establishment of English Rule in New York. Two years after the establishment of Jamestown, Henry Hudson, an Englishman sailing for the Dutch, explored the great river which now bears his name. Since the Dutch made their living from trade, they swiftly saw the profit which might be made from the furs to be found in the valley. Accordingly, in 1624 they established Fort Orange, a trading post at the site of modern Albany. They called this colony New Netherland. In 1625, the tiny settlement of New' Amsterdam on Manhattan Island was founded. During the next several decades, the Dutch planted settlements on Long Island, into the Connecticut River Valley, and westward into present-day New Jersey. Here they came into conflict with a small colony of Swedes w'ho had built their Fort Christiana where Wilmington, Delaware, now stands. In 1655, after some years of sporadic hostilities, a Dutch force captured the Swedish post. Now New Nether- land extended from Delaware Bay to the Connecticut River. This was a situation which displeased the English. These Dutch settlements were not only a barrier to the westward expansion of New England but were a wedge dividing New' England from the English colonies on Chesapeake Bay. In the summer of 1664, therefore, in the course of an Anglo-Dutch war, a small English fleet captured New Amsterdam without a struggle. The King of England, Charles II, promptly gave his brother, James, Duke of York, title to the province. Although the English gave generous terms to the Dutch citizens of New Amsterdam, they did not grant any substantial measure of self-government to the colony w'hich they renamed New York. Pennsylvania, Delaware, and New Jersey. Although the Swedes and the Dutch had made scattered settlements along the lower Delaware River, it w'as the Quaker convert, William Penn, who set into motion the opening of Pennsylvania, western New Jersey, and Delaware to English settlement. In 1681, Penn received from Charles II a vast grant of land which lay between the 40th and 43rd parallels of latitude, and which extended westward from the Delaware River through five degrees of longitude, or about 300 miles. To attract settlers to his new domain, Penn promised considerable self-government anti religious freedom. His pamphlets, published in Dutch, German, French, Welsh, and Irish, described the pleasant climate, plentiful game, fertile soil, and the friendly relations with the Indians. In two years, more than 3000 people came to the colony, several hundred of whom settled in Philadelphia, w hich Penn had laid out in 1682. During these first decades, English, Irish and Welsh Quakers, German Mennonites, Scotch-lrish Presbyterians, Anglicans, and Roman Catholics from several countries enjoyed the privilege of religious freedom. Philadelphia quickly became a cosmopolitan city. Penn also acquired, by a deed from the Duke of York, possession of the Swedish and Dutch settlements along the lower Delaware River. In 1701, these towns became the separate colony of Delaware, and while they W'ere permitted to elect their own legislature, they remained under the jurisdiction of the governor of Pennsylvania. The lands which became the colony of New' Jersey did not readily attract large numbers of settlers, since land ownership in neighboring Pennsylvania was available on generous terms, and opportunities existed for trade in nearby New York and Philadelphia. The region was actually settled from both east and west, but in 1702, the two sections were united into one royal colony. The Planting of Maryland. A quarter century after Jamestown, a second colony established itself on a grant of land north of the Potomac River, and within the original territory assigned to Virginia. This settlement of Maryland resulted from the efforts of George Calvert, Lord Baltimore, to found a refuge for persecuted fellow' Roman Catholics, and to carve out of the American wilderness a profitable domain for himself. Few' Catholics, however, came to St. Mary's which Governor Leonard Calvert planted on the Potomac in 1634. Nonetheless, religious disputes between Catholics and Protestants in the colony, and boundary disputes with Virginia, insured a troubled career for the settlement. Maryland became the first successful proprietary colony. The proprietor — Lord Bal Diet was "King" Philip's War, 1675—1678, which erupted as settlers began to fill the Connecticut Valley. Another war flared in North Carolina in 1711 —1712 between the advancing settlers and the Tuscarora tribe. In each instance, the whites triumphed, as they generally did also in the large number of local clashes which flared up along the line of advancing white settlement. 1. What was the fundamental right which all Englishmen believed they possessed? 2. List powers which the royal governors had lost by 1760. What powers did colonial assemblies exercise? 3. How did the Dominion of New England change the governmental structure of seven English colonies? Why did the Dominion collapse? 4. Discuss the reasons for Bacon's Rebellion, and the revolt of the Regulators. The Colonies Grow Populous and Self- Sufficient Most of the first settlers came to America to gain land of their own, and to enjoy the products of their own labor. By necessity, the colonies almost immediately became agriculturally self-sufficient. Small trading towns on the coast, or at the fall line of a river, where rapids began, supplied the goods the farmers could not make for themselves. The lure of land drew many of the newcomers into the fields and forests of the interior, creating persistent labor shortages in the towns and on large farms. In an effort to remedy this situation, and to create a stable and dependable supply of workers, employers turned first to indentured servants. Indentured Servants. In eighteenth century England — and to a similar degree in many parts of Rhineland Germany — many people stood ready to join the colonial labor force. Multitudes of paupers, beggars, underemployed, discharged soldiers and sailors, and orphans endured deprived and miserable lives. Other thousands filled the prisons of a dozen English cities, many of whom had committed a crime no more heinous than that of stealing food to feed a starving family. Religious dissenters were willing to undergo great hardships in order to worship in their own way. Still others wanted to create a new life for themselves in the free climate of die New World. In order to tap this abundant labor supply, the colonies soon adopted the indenture system. A needy person might sign a contract, or indenture, selling his services in the colonies for a stated number of years — usually from three to seven, depending on skill — in exchange for the passage. During this time he would work for his employer, who, in turn, would feed and house him. When his contract expired he was free to work for wages, or, if skilled, to start business for himself. There were also opportunities for him to acquire his own land. Indentured servants came to America in great numbers. For example, the tobacco colonies of Virginia and Maryland imported between 1500 and 2000 servants yearly between 1635 and 1705. In 1683, indentured servants represented 16 percent of the total population of Virginia. During the 1680's, about 36 percent of the immigrants in Pennsylvania had signed an indenture contract, a figure which remained at a high level during the next half century. The Introduction of Negro Slavery. Slavery — a blight upon mankind since the dawn of history — had almost disappeared from Europe by the beginning of the Renaissance but was still widely practiced in Asia and Africa. Negro slavery was not reintroduced in Europe until the Portuguese African explorations of the fifteenth century. The first Negro in America sailed with Columbus in 1492. By the time Jamestown was established, Negro slavery was widespread throughout the Caribbean. In 1619, twenty Negroes from the West Indies were brought to Virginia where they evidently enjoyed much the same status as white indentured servants. By mid-century, when only a few hundred Negroes were scattered throughout the colonies, conditions had begun to change. Massachusetts first legalized Negro slavery in 1641, and Virginia followed twenty years later. The other colonies soon established similar laws. After 1700, the importation of Negroes became a flood, and it was not long thereafter before a bribe, was an immediate "No, no! Not a sixpence!'' from Commissioner Pinckney. Upon receiving news of this contemptuous treatment of his envoys. President Adams recalled the commission from France and published the entire record of the affair. An air of mystery was added by labeling the three French agents of Tallyrand merely as "X, Y, and Z." Reacting against the French insult to the United States, incensed Americans called for war. Parading crowds shouted the slogan introduced by one of the commissioners, "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute!" Undeclared War with France. Meanwhile Congress enthusiastically pushed military and naval preparations and suspended all commerce with France. During 1797, three heavy frigates, or cruisers, were launched from American shipyards. One of litem, the long-lived Constitution, later earned the nickname "Old Iron- sides." In the following year, Congress created the Department of the Navy, under the executive branch of the government. The army was also strengthened, and Washington was summoned from Mount Vernon to take command in the event of war. Although war remained undeclared, hostilities existed. Both France and the United States earnestly began to seize each other's ships. Indeed, the new navy earned its first laurels in this undeclared war when the frigate. Constellation, outfought and captured L'lnsurgente, a French warship which had preyed on many American vessels. A swarm of over 400 privateers was commissioned by the American government to seek out and capture French vessels. Together with the 80-ship navy, they succeeded in bringing into American ports 84 captured French ships. On the other hand, American losses also were heavy. The British, of course, were delighted by this turn of events. Unofficially allied with the United States, they provided military supplies to the navy and also exchanged naval signals with American warships operating in the same area. Nevertheless, President Adams had no intention of allowing these naval hostilities to lead to an open war with France. Adams shared Washington's belief that war, even a popular one, should be avoided at all costs. The Alien and Sedition Acts, 1798. While the United States was waging an undeclared war at sea, Federalists and Republicans at home argued with mounting bitterness the respective merits of the two European belligerents, Great Britain and France. The Republicans spoke for revolutionary France, which carried on its banners the slogan "Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity." They designated the French Revolution as the philosophical successor of the American Revolution, which had stood for liberty and the rights of the common man. Federalist leaders, on the other hand, supported Great Britain because British merchants had become America's best customer. British laws and customs, moreover, had helped to guide American leaders in the making of the new government. Finally, the Federalists did not view revolutionary France through the rosy-hued glasses of the Republicans. They were appalled at the "reign of terror," and at the excesses of the Revolution after 1792. Another matter that disturbed the Federalists was the fact that a few influential foreigners had risen to leadership in the Republican Party. Because most of these aliens had fled Europe for America to secure liberties denied them in their former homelands, they tended to support Jefferson's party. At die same time, they attacked Adams' policies against France. Fearful that these talented newcomers would spread pro-French sentiment, alarmed Federalists thought it politically expedient to tighten citizenship requirements and to restrain aliens from criticizing the administration's policies. To his credit, the upright Adams did not provide the leadership in this effort to muzzle the opposition. the Alien Enemies Act, and (4) the Sedition Act. The Alien Act authorized the President to deport any alien whose presence in the country appeared to endanger the nation's welfare. The Alien Enemies Act gave the President the power, in time of war or invasion, to imprison or deport foreigners he judged to be dangerous to the security of the nation. The Federalists explained away these acts as necessary precautions in the event of war. But it was apparent to the Republicans that their real purpose was to still any criticism of Federalist policies. The Naturalization Act raised the residence requirement for citizenship from 5 to 14 years. This law successfully denied, for the time being, citizenship and the right to vote to thousands of would-be Republican immigrants. The fourth of this scries of laws, the Sedition Act, prescribed heavy fines and imprisonment for any person found guilty of writing, publishing, or speaking anything of a "false, scandalous and malicious" nature against the government or any government official. This act was aimed at American citizens themselves and was responsible for ten convictions against Republican critics of Adams. The Jefferso- nians were rightfully angered by the partisan vigor shown by Federalist judges in convicting political wrongdoers." They wished to attack the constitutionality of the hated law, yet they hardly expected Federalist judges to declare it unconstitutional. The fear of punishment tended to keep many people, such as edi- , tors, from criticizing the government. To preserve the freedom of the human mind then and freedom of the press, every spirit should be ready to devote itself to martyrdom; fur as long as we may think as we will, and speak as we think the condition of man will proceed in improvement. Thomas Jefferson to William Mumford, June 18.1799 The Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions. Jefferson, Madison, and many of their followers made no secret of the fact that they resided the Alien and Sedition Acts destructive of free speech and contrary to the First Amendment. Jefferson put such thoughts to paper, and his Kentucky friends persuaded the Ktntuckv legislature to adopt them as its policy. Madison wrote a similar proposal that was adopted by the Virginia legislature. These Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, passed in 1798 and 1799, claimed for the states, acting together, the right to nullify, or to deny, an act of Congress, if they judged that act unconstitutional. This was before the Supreme Court took it upon itself, through the doctrine of judicial review, to become the judge of the constitutionality of laws passed by Congress. Even though the public generally supported the Jeffersonians' protest against the Alien and Sedition Acts, no other state supported the stand of Virginia and Kentucky. Jefferson wisely counseled the Republicans to avoid dragging the dispute into bloodshed. "The reign of witches," he told them, w'ould soon be over. He was confident that the election of r8oo would bring to an end the day of the Federalist. As it turned out, he was correct. I have sworn upon the altar of God eternal hostility against every form of tyranny over the mind of man. Thomas Jefferson Adams Finally Achieves Peace with France. While the nation clamored for wrar, President Adams worked for peace. His efforts, however, disturbed the leaders of his own Federalist Party, wrho knew that the voters might reelect the party which led them into a popular w ar. The Federalists felt that Adams was throwing away his own chances for a second term. But Adams was a courageous man when the issue at hand concerned basic principles. The interests of the nation were more important to him than party politics. In 1799, Adams informed Congress that he w'ould send a minister to France whenever France gave its "assurances that he will be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation." This indirect invitation was good enough for Napoleon Bonaparte, who had overthrown the French Directory and established a military dictatorship. As he had promised, Napoleon received the American peace commission in a friendly way. However, it was several months before a settlement was reached. The two stumbling blocks to an agreement were the American demands that France pay $20,000,000 damages for the ships its cruisers had captured, and that it cancel the old, now hated French-American alli- *5" One Question Leads to Another Why did Hamilton indicate that a national debt could be a "public blessing"? What class of people would benefit from holding certificates of this public debt? Where could they exchange their certificates, or bonds, for cash or credit? What advice would Hamilton have given them regarding their investments? Does the national government today have a large debt? To whom is it owed? Are steps being taken to pay it? Since much of this present debt came into being when the Treasury exchanged its bonds for cash and credit at the Federal Reserve Banks, might we agree with Hamilton that the national debt is a public blessing? What might happen if the debt were paid up quickly? What might happen if the government raised taxes sufficiently to make substantial payments on the national debt? What might happen if the debt simply continued to grow? Do states have debts also? do cities and school boards? Does government debt place the burden of one generation upon the next? The events and situations in this exercise follow one another in time and in cause and efFect. For each step of the ladder, beginning at the bottom rung: (i) identify and briefly describe the event printed in capital letters, (2) answer the question located beside it, and (3) explain how the event or situation leads to the one immediately above. Why did peace with France, coupled with the Alien and Sedition Acts, seriously injure President Adams' prospects for reelection in 1800? With what foreign problem did President Adams concern himself while Jefferson and his supporters condemned the Alien and Sedition Acts? Why did this attitude cause the Federalists to adopt measures limiting naturalization of aliens and freedom of speech and the press? What congressional action resulted from the XYZ Affair? What action did Britain take to make President Washington's position on the Genit affair even more unpopular? Why did President Washington decide to proclaim United States neutrality? Why would republican France expect American aid in its struggle against Britain and its dies? Why wotdd other European nations oppose the extension of French Resolutionary ideas across the continent? Historians have recognized the decades of the 1830's and the 1840's as a period when a variety of reform efforts came to die foreground in die United States. Some of these efforts faded away and are now almost forgotten, but others played an important part in establishing some of the democratic freedoms we now enjoy. It was in this period that certain reformers worked to establish free public education. Others pressed for the right of women to vote. There were groups that fought for the rights of the working man; and those who led a crusade for temperance. There were the intellectuals Fmerson and Thoreau, who believed that man must transcend his environment by seeking his freedom within himself and following the dictates of his own conscience. Overshadow ing all the other campaigns against human injustice, the most important and most far-reaching became the antislavery movement. Why, may we ask, should this period have been so marked in effort toward social reform -or has die American always been a reformer, discovering his social concerns in the needs of the time in which he lives? If the latter be true, what was there about this particular period that awakened the conscience of the people on so many different questions? One factor, undoubtedly, was related to the new emphasis being placed upon the individual in the era of Jacksonian democracy. Manhood suffrage was rapidly being gained, half the states having adopted it by the time Jackson was elected. North Carolina, the last state to hold land ownership as a requirement for voting, dropped that restriction in 1856. As more men gained the right to vote, interest in politics sharpened, and more persons became aware of social and economic conditions that affected their part of the country — and the nation. This was a changing America. The growth of factories brought new problems to eastern cities. The rise of the Cotton Kingdom fastened slavery more firmly than ever on the South. Seeing the need for social changes that would keep pace with the economy, concerned Americans — as they had in time past, and as they would in years to come — set about trying to correct some of the abuses they discovered. Not all of the reforms were new. The question of slavery had long troubled the conscience of many Americans, as had the need for better education; but in this period, a new' spirit seemed to sweep over the land, searching out needs and proposing changes. Grow'ing Factories and Increased Immigration Create New Problems In the 1820's, labor from sunup to sundown was common on farms, but farm tasks were varied. Factory workers of the early nineteenth century', who also worked from twelve to fifteen hours a day, spent those hours in jioorly ventilated factories doing work that gen. orally was routine and repetitious. Many women labored in New England textile mills as did very young children who had little opportunity to attend school. For a time, labor conditions in the cotton mills of Waltham and Lowell, Massachusetts were considered satisfactory by the women and children workers accustomed to the day-long tasks on the farm. The management attrac tively landscaped factory grounds, provided proper boarding houses, and afforded the workers opportunities for recreation, education, and religious instruction in their limited free hours. By the end of the 1830's, however, even these conditions deteriorated as immigrants by the thousands offered their labor at barely subsistence levels, and new, less socially-concerned mills arose to compete fiercely for textile sales. The rise of the American labor movement began during these times. Women factory workers struck for the first recorded time at Pawtucket, Rhode Island in 1824. Ten years later came the initial walkout at tire Lowell mills. During the following decade, women walked off their jobs frequently throughout the Northeast — they had reason enough. Women worked for an estimated quarter of the wages paid men. Thousands received as little as twenty-five cents a day. Strikes, however, generally were short-lived and unsuccessful. Labor organizations were local, under-financed, and often opposed by men who feared die competition of low-paid women. Briefly, under the leadership of Sarah Bagley, corresponding secretary of the New England Workingmen's Association, an area- wide Female Labor Reform Association emerged (1845-47), only to be crushed when the Massachusetts legislature refused to support a ten hour day for women. Ilow the Panic of 1S37 Affected City Worker. The depression that followed the Panic of 1837 added to the hardships already endured by thousands of workers. Some 200,000 needy jieople in New York city, for example, were destitute, and desperate, as were great numbers of unemployed in other cities. The worried editor of a New York newspaper warned the government that a "civil volcano" would explode if the [flight of the poor was not eased. Rising food prices further stretched the already taut tempers of the unemployed. The price of a barrel of flour or a pound of pork, for instance, almost doubled during the two- year period from 1835 to 1837. The cost of coal and rents rose alarmingly. During the early part of 1837, bread riots occurred in New York. Upsurge in Immigration. Fewer than 400,000 immigrants entered the country in the period between 1790 and 1830. In startling contrast, about 2,500,000 jieople came during the following three decades. Largely responsible for this upsurge were dissatisfaction with conditions in Europe and a desire for freedom of opportunity. "Come to Glorious America" brochures, distributed widely in Europe by construction and manufacturing companies, shipping lines, and railroads — all of which hoped to secure cheap labor — also spurred interest. The overwhelming majority of the immigrants of this period came from northern and western Europe. Germany and Ireland furnished the greatest number. Driven by uninterrupted poverty, almost 1,500,000 Irish came to America between 1845 and i860. The potato famine of 1845 A great wave of immigration began in the 1840's, with most of the newcomers stemming from Germany and Ireland. This scene vvfis painted in 1850. Brown Brothers and 1846 had added to their hardships. Many found work digging canals or laying the ties and rails for the early railroads. Others stoked the lires on hundreds of steamboats cruising the inland waterways or dug sewers or excavations for the foundations of new city buildings. Thousands of Irish immigrants settled in the slums of Boston or New York community clusters. Other Irish communities grew in such major cities as Albany, Baltimore, St. Louis, Cincinnati, and New Orleans, as well as in the factorv towns of New England. As they became citizens, the Irish began to make their influence felt in municipal politics. In the decade between 1850 and i860, ncarlv a million German immigrants arrived in the United States. Many were political refugees seeking freedom after the reform Revolution of 1848 in their homeland had collapsed. Thousands were skilled artisans who saw no future for themselves in an increasingly factory-dommated Germany. A number of German immigrants moved west to the Ohio Valley or the Great Lakes region, where they farmed or established businesses in Cincinnati, Chicago, Milwaukee, or St. Louis. They organized their own communities, built their own social halls where German songs were sung, sponsored German bands, and built their own schools. Some Americans Resented the Immigrants. Immigrants had been welcomed to America in the davs when land was available to all and labor was scarce. Bv the 1850's however, nincteenth-centurv immigrants made up half the population of New York city. In Chicago, Milwaukee, and St. Louis, they soon out-num- bered native-born residents. A considerable number of Americans grew resentful of the fact that the immigrants worked for low wages, thereby threatening the standard of liv ing. In closely knit immigrant communities in the cities, the newcomers tended to cling to their old customs. Since there was frequently little contact between the newcomers and native Americans, other than at work, unnecessary misunderstandings and misconceptions grew up on both sides. Although the majority of immigrants settled in the north and the mid-west. Southerners resented them because they added to the population of the North, and hence to its representation in Congress. Other objections were based on religion. In a predominantly Protestant country, the great influx of Irish ami Germans was adding greatly to the Catholic population. In the mivl-18 50's a political group called "Know-Nothings" captured several legislatures and elected many governers. Officially called the American Party, they had received their nickname because, when questioned about their membership in a secret organization, their reply was: "I know nothing." The Know-Nothings wanted to restrict immigration and extend the naturalization period to 21 years. Although, at one time, 70 congressmen represented this party, their efforts to push anti-immigration lows were unsuccessful. The movement declined as the Know-Nothings split over the issues of slavery and sectional conflicts. Regardless of such unreasoned opposition, the immigrants were making valuable contributions to American life. Their skills and talents and Old World background were making a remarkable contribution to the United States^ as well as enriching its culture. There are few Jews in the United States; in Maryland there are very few. But if there were only one — to that one, we ought to do justice. Thomas Kennedy, demanding change in Maryland Constitution requiring officeholders to be Christians. Clause was repealed in 1826 1. What conditions prompted the Irish emigration to America from 1845 to i860? 2. Why did many German refugees come in that period? 3. Why did some Americans fear the influx of immigrants? 4. Who were the Know-Nothings? Describe their activities. Voices of Protest and Reform As the nation grew rapidly, the pattern of life in America shifted under the impact of growing factory town, of heightening sectional differences and of new currents of thought. Resulting stresses and strains prompted a number of persons to set about trying to find ways to correct abuses that grew up. During the Jacksonian period and in the years following, a variety of reform efforts appeared. "We are all a little wild here with numerous projects of social reform," wrote Ralph Waldo Emerson to a friend in England. The Transcendentalists Stress Self-Realization. Emerson, essayist, philosopher, and a former Unitarian minister, became one of the chief spokesmen for a small but highly literate group in New England known as Transcendentalists. Among them were Emerson's neighbor Henry David Tlioreau; Bronson Alcott, teacher and writer; the historian George Bancroft; Margaret Fuller, who edited the Transcendentalist publication, the Dial; Elizabeth Peabody, who was active in trying to improve education; and a Unitarian clergyman, William Eller)' Chan- ning. The Transcendentalist Club met regularly from 1836 to 1845 to discuss philosophy. Always seeking deeper insights, they subscribed to no formal doctrine; but in general, they were persons who were concerned that most persons were failing to realize their full potential. It was their view that man could transcend, or lift himself above, his immediate environment; that he should strive to achieve self-realization by following "that gleam of fight that flashes across his mind from within." Each man must, therefore, be free to think for himself and make his own decisions. For some Transcendentalists, as with Thoreau, the spiritual search took the form of extreme individualism. For others, it became translated into such social-reform efforts as antislavery and the labor movement. To Emerson, democracy was the ideal pattern of existence, for it represented "the spirit of love for the general good." Urging his listeners to be self-reliant and independent thinkers, to face the future with optimism and hope, and to free themselves from ignorance and prejudice, he warned that democracy could not survive if individuals permitted prejudice and material greed to govern their actions. Emerson believed that democracy was capable of solving the problems created by industrialization, and he welcomed the new immigrants because they brought with them enthusiasm and faith. To Henry Thoreau, the average man lived a fife of "quiet desperation" because he was burdened with possessions and meaningless routine. Although Thoreau shared Emerson's belief in liberty and individual dignity, he felt that both were stifled in the rising tide of industrialization and the increasing power of the federal government. To discover for himself the essence of life, Thoreau built a hut on Emerson's property at Walden Pond, not far from Concord, where he lived in solitude for about two years. Living simply and self-reliantly on the resources of the countryside, he set down an account of his experiences in Walden, a volume published in 1854. Thoreau felt that men paid too high a price for their creature comforts and the ownership of private property. He explained: cabinet members, and military advisers, therefore, lie ordered that supplies be sent to the post by a naval expedition. But he took care to inform the governor of South Carolina hv special messenger that the supply ships on the way were unarmed and that the expedition's mission was peaceful. He pledged that no reinforcements of men or ammunition would be brought in. Firing on Fort Sumter Begins the War. These assurances failed to influence the Confederates. After hours of desperate talks, the Davis government charged General Pierre Beauregard at Charleston to demand the surrender of Fort Sumter. If Major Anderson refused, Beauregard's orders were to "reduce" the place. When Beauregard delivered the demand, Anderson rejected it. At the beginning of the war, the North was producing more than 92 percent of the nation's total output of manufactured goods. New York alone provided goods totaling four times the value of those produced in the entire South. Northern factories built 90 percent of the nation's locomotives and firearms. Their output of woolen goods, boots and shoes, iron products, and coal was similarly impressive. The Civil War was the first war employing railroads to transport men and supplies to places where they were needed. Undoubtedly the North's greatest internal advantage was its vast network of rails that tied together the Northeast and the Ohio and Mississippi valleys. By contrast, the railroad system available to the South was inadequate, in spite of the expansion of Southern lines in the 1850's. These progressively deteriorated during the war for lack of repair facilities. Many of its people suffered hunger and privation in the last years of the war because of the lack of rail transportation. The Union control of the navy and a large part of the merchant marine also enabled it to carry on a fairly effective blockade of the southern coastline. Union river craft also made possible the invasion and conquest of the western war area between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River. The L!nion navy supplied Northern armies at crucial points in the western war theater and also joined in the attacks. Quite possibly, the Union without the navy would not have won in the West. H. A. Harvey The silencing of the guns of war opened a new era for the nation, bill an era fraught with problems. The two great armies had to be demobilized. The nation had to change almost overnight from war to a peace economy. Most important, it was necessary to "bind up die nation's wounds" al ter four years of increasing sectional bitterness. The southern states had to reassume their former place in the Union. At the same time, the South had to develop an economy based on free labor. And what of the newly freed Negro? What place would he have in the life of the nation? All of these questions confronted the nation with the coming of peace. The era needed statesmanship and eooperation. Could it find these in a new anil untried Executive and in an increasingly hostile Congress? Congress Rejects the Johnson Plan of Reconstruction The veterans in blue returned home to triumphant victory parades and reunions with families and friends. The demobilization of this powerful army was accomplished at breakneck speed. The War Department had mustered out over 800,000 Union soldiers by November, 1865. Two years later, the United States Army bad reached the peacetime strength of only 57,000 officers and men. With the end of hostilities came a short, and mild recession. The economic distress made more difficult the absorption into civilian life of 1,500,000 men who previously had been in the army and of many adults among the 600,000 immigrants who entered the nation in 1866 and 1867. By 1868, however, these hard times had run their course, and the North, at least, entered a period of remarkable prosperity. For the defeated and destitute veterans in gray, the homeward trek promised little hope. Military railroad crews did what they could, considering the broken condition of southern lines, to transport men to distant homes. Most of the soldiers, however, trudged on foot, traveling in small groups for self-protection against bands of deserters who, with the end of the fighting, had turned to brigandage for a livelihood. A Devastated South. Destruction was everywhere. Columbia, the once graceful capital of South Carolina, was "a wilderness of crumbling, naked chimneys, and trees lulled by flames." The great seaport. Charleston, had become a scorched, deserted, and shell-scarred ruin. South Carolina rice fields sprouted w'ccds and tangled shrubbery. An English traveler, Robert Somers, described the Tennessee Valley as an area of semiruined or totalh ruined plantations. Visible everywhere were burnt cotton-gin houses. ji#*!! Thomas Giltteate Institute, Tulsa, Oklahoma Chinese provided much of the labor force for the Central Pacific and other western railroads. Fuel shortages were equally distressing. Scarce wood was hauled in from almost any reasonable distance. In addition, families turned to such unlikely sources of fuel as buffalo "chips," which was dried manure; dried hav. corncobs and cornstalks; or the stalks of sunflower plants. Only after the arrival of coal shipments on newly built railroads was the fuel problem solved with any real success. The weather had many tricks to play. Spring could produce disastrous Hoods that would inundate homes and drown cattle. Summer might parch the earth with i co-de- gree temperatures for days and weeks at a time orbring clouds of grasshoppers to devour crops. Autumn was a time for concern about dreaded prairie fires that caught easily in the dry grass. Winter offered the prospect of chilling winds and icy blizzards that destroyed young live- stork and froze food in the drafts' houses. But despite all these discomforts and hazards, many frontiersmen held steadfast and eventually won their encounter with the un- friendlv environment of the Great Plains. Thes found the lure of cheap land and the prospect of good markets for farm products sufficient reasons to twister their tenacity. Millions of Immigrants Settle in the West. Among the pioneers who first settled the agricultural lands of the plains anil prairies were immigrants newly arrived from Europe. About 14,000,000 foreigners came to the United States between the years i860 and 1900. Their interest was stimulated by glowing reports of the new industrial America and the expanding W est. Mans European men were further encouraged to leave their homes to avoid the prospect of compulsory military service brought on by European wars. Poor crops during the 1870's in some of the European wheat-growing regions provided still another inducement. The bulk of immigrants remained in the eastern cities to work in the growing factories. But the West was also active in efforts to entice the foreign-born. Immigration bureaus were maintained in some of the western states to draw immigrants and help the newcomers on their arrival. The western railroads sent agents abroad to encourage settlement in an America painted as a land of freedom and opportunity, sometimes even as a virtual "garden of Eden." Typical was a Union Pacific Railroad description of the Platte River Valley as "a flowery meadow of great fertility clothed in nutritious grasses, and watered by numerous streams." The migration of Scandinavians into Wisconsin and Minnesota was especially heavy. Areas farther west also felt the impact of the rising tide of foreigners coming to American shores. In many growing communities on the Great Plains, Scandinavian, Irish, Scottish, English, German, and Russian immigrants furnished a significant portion of the population that helped to settle the Great West in the 1870's. Their communities were among the civilizing factors that finally transformed the "Wild West" into settled states. The Great West fs Carved into States. In the years between 1861 and 1912, fourteen new states were carved out of the region west of the Mississippi. They were much larger in area, but often smaller in population, than the states of the East. Kansas was the first of the new states. It was admitted as a free state in 1861 in the heat of the slavery controversy. Nevada followed in 1864 in the wake of silver discoveries. The territory then had only some 20,000 people, not enough ordinarily to form a state. Nebraska attained statehood in 1867, following the rapid settlement of rich eastern farmlands in the territory early in the 1860's. Colorado became the "Centennial State" in 1876, after having endeavored for almost twenty years to join the Union. Four new states entered the Union in 1889. The thriving Dakota territory, with a population of half a million, was split and admitted as two separate states, North Dakota and South Dakota. Montana and Washington were admitted in the same year, with copper mining and ranching contributing to the growth of Montana and the extension of the Northern Pacific Railroad hastening the development of Washington. The following year, 1890, two other large land areas, Wyoming and Idaho, were added to die growing list of stales. Catde ranches and farming contributed to Wyoming's growth. Idaho grew in the wake of gold, silver, lead, and zinc discoveries, Utah was belatedly admitted as a state in 1896, about fifty years after the Mormons first settled the region. The tardiness in its admission can be attributed, in part, to opposition in Congress to certain aspects of the Mormon religion, particularly the earlier practice of polygamy. Portions of the Indian Territory in the Oklahoma region were made available for settlement, beginning in 1889. The opening of the rich lands and the subsequent discovery of oil led to rapid growth. In 1907 Oklahoma was made a state. At the time its population was about half a million. New Mexico and Arizona, both territories writh a long, interesting history, were admitted to statehood in 1912. The coming of railroads to New Mexico brought ranchers and farmers, while mining was more important in the early growth of Arizona. x. Of what importance were barbed wire and windmills to western settlement? 2. What was the relationship between the Homestead Act and the building of western railroads? 55, Give some of the problems confronting the plains farmer. 4. Why did some European immigrants migrate to the plains? Expansion into the Pacific Northwest A major obstruction to the settlement of the Pacific Northwest was cleared in 1846 by the treaty between the United States and Britain, which fixed the northern boundary of the United States at the 49th parallel. Within the next few years the population of the region increased sufficiently to allow the admission of the state of Oregon to the Union in 1859. Contributing to the growth of the Pacific Northwest were extravagant mineral deposits, extensive fishing grounds, and giant forests. In the 1850's, there were gold strikes in Idaho and western Montana, which not only lured prospectors to the mines but also helped to publicize other parts of the region. One of the best ways to reach the gold strikes from die Pacific coast was by boat up the Columbia and Snake rivers, a route that uncovered the attractive potentialities of the region for settlement. The Union Pacific carried its construction westward across the Great Plains, using crews of war veterans and Irish immigrants. The workers were harassed by hostile Indians, and the work was slowed by herds of roaming buffalo. Even so, the Union Pacific crew sometimes laid rails at the rate of ten miles a day. The Central Pacific was faced with a different problem — the difficulty of building through the rugged Sierra Nevada Mountains and across barren plateaus and basins. Much of this work was done by Chinese laborers brought into the country for that purpose. Finally, on May to, 1869, at Promontory Point, Utah, the job was completed. Two locomotives, drawn up to face each other, symbolized the "wedding of the rails." A couple of golden spikes were driven with a silver-plated hammer to symbolize the historic event. The message was passed to an expectant nation by telegraph, and the Liberty Bell tolled in Philadelphia's Independence Hall. The Growth of Western Railroads. It would be difficult to overestimate the enthusiasm for western railroad building, following the successful completion of the first transcontinental. Across the face of the West, company after company, with the aid of a generous Congress, stretched a web of iron rails. In 1869, Jay Cooke, an eastern financier, obtained the charter for the Northern Pacific Railroad. He had the road well on its way from Lake Superior toward the Pacific before going bankrupt in the Panic of 1873. The Atchison, Topeka & Santa Fe w'as built west out of Kansas across the plains, reaching Colorado in 1872. This line found prosperity in the shipping of cattle and continued into southern California. In 1884 the Southern Pacific Company was formed through an agreement between the western railroad builder Coll is P. Huntington and the eastern financier Jay Gould. James J. Hill, builder of the Great Northern, was perhaps the most notable of the western railroad men. A Canadian, Hill had moved to St. Paul, Minnesota, in the x850's, where he worked as a freight agent. In 1873 he acquired a small struggling railroad, the St. Paul & Pacific, which he extended northward into Canada. Then, renaming the line Great Northern, he ran the railroad westward across Minnesota, North Dakota, and Montana, through the mountains. By 1893, it reached Puget Sound. The same year he acquired part interest in the Northern Pacific and saved it from the brink of ruin brought on by the Panic of 1893. The Nc-York Historical Society The tremendous expansion of business and the new economic opportunities that marked the last decades of the nineteenth century also saw the beginnings of strong labor organizations. Labor unions were not new on the American scene, but they had never been powerful, nor had they been nationwide in scope. As business organized, however, so did labor. At first, labor's steps in organizing, and its demands concerning pay, hours, and working conditions, were halting and unsuccessful. But by 1900, powerful trade unions had developed that could make their demands respected. Another factor in the new America that followed the Civil War was the continuing flood of immigration, particularly from southern and eastern Europe. Nearly 14,000,000 immigrants reached American shores in the three decades between 1870 and 1900. The I ,abor Movement Grows in Industrial Cities The poor conditions in the early factories caused workers to press for improved working conditions. One obvious answer to their problem was to organize. As early as 1648 there had been an organization of barrelmakers and shoemakers in Boston. These artisans had joined forces to try to limit the number of workers engaged in these trades. During the Revolutionary War, isolated groups of craftsmen in coastal cities had banded together to protest their wages and working conditions. In 1792 shoemakers organized the first local union in Philadelphia. Two years after organizing, the Philadelphia shoemakers were advocating the closed shop, a business in which only union members were hired. By 1799 shoemakers were engaging in a kind of collective bargaining with their employers. They were also resorting to the use of the strike, a weapon that won them the first union contract. Striking workers in the early 1800's were confronted with hostile courts of law. Strikes were ruled to be "criminal conspiracies." In the eyes of the court, strikers organizing for the purpose of gaining higher wages were conspiring to deprive the employer of his property without due process of law. The court rulings provided employers with an effective weapon against these early unions. Labor Makes Some Limited Gains in the f irst Half of the Nineteenth Century. Despite the hostility of the courts, there was some union growth in the first half of the nineteenth century. Late in the 1820's fifteen Philadelphia unions formed the Mechanics' Union of Trade Associations. The organization became active in the national elections of 1828 for the purpose of representing "the interests of the working classes." By the 1830's the courts had begun to change their view of labor organization. Unions were then able to Immigrants Provide a Valuable Labor Supply for the Building of Modem America The population of the United States virtually doubled between 1870 and 1900, from more than 38,000,000 to almost 76,000,000. A substantial part of the increase was the result of immigration from other countries. About 14,000,000 immigrants came to American shores during the last 40 years of the century. The immigrants of these years had fled to America because of lessening opportunities in Europe and what appeared to be the greater opportunities still offered by the New World. Their reasons for immigrating were similar to those of earlier immigrants to America. America, to these people, represented possibly the last, best hope on earth for a better life. Some, like numbers of Jewish immigrants, were seeking relief from religious "pogroms," or oppressive outbreaks against them. But all were drawn by the American dream of opportunity. It promised chances to work for a living wage, and to rise in social and economic status. But were these promises always fulfilled? Frequently they were not. The average w'ages provided only the barest means of getting along. To make matters worse, where sympathy and a helping hand were needed to aid the immigrants, many Americans — contemptuous of alien ways — treated the newcomers with suspicion and distrust. The Patterns of F.uropean Immigration Change. The latter years of the nineteenth century and the early years of the twentieth produced a considerable shift in the national origins of immigrants from Europe. At the close of the colonial period, the American people were heavily northern and western Euro- By the late 19th century, most immigrants were coming from southern and eastern Europe, but their goals were not unlike those of the first settlers: hopes for a better life, expanding opportunity. Nrw York Public Library pean in origin. A century later the situation was substantially (he same. During the 1860's, for example, of the approximately 2,300,000 immigrants who arrived in the United States, over 90 percent were from northern and western Europe. As late as the 1880's, 72 percent of the immigrants were from these areas, predominantly from the British Isles, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. In the 1890's a dramatic change occurred. During this decade more than 50 percent of the immigrants were southern and eastern Europeans — Italians, Russians, Hungarians, Poles, Czechs, Greeks, and others. This trend gained impetus during the first decade of the new century. Between 1900 and 1910, approximately 9,000,000 newcomers poured onto American soil. Of these, 70 percent were of southern and eastern European origin. After the establishment of a quota system in the 1920's (see p. 535), the trend was gradually reversed, both in total numbers and in national origin. Of approximately 4,000,000 immigrants in the 1920's, fewer than 30 percent were from southern and eastern Europe. The "New Immigrant" Faces Problems. The immigrants from southern and eastern Europe were drawn by the lure of jobs to the factories and businesses of the big cities, smaller industrial cities, and mining towns. Teeming thousands huddled in the tenements, slums, and ghettos of the rapidly growing cities. Because these immigrants, in great numbers, brought many different languages, religions, and customs, they came to be labeled the "new immigrants." For the immigrant who settled in the eastern cities, the factory introduced a new, machinelike relationship between employer and employee. It forced the laborer into a routine that ignored his individuality as a human being. His activities within the factorv routine took on a meaningless pattern. Often the worker had little idea of what the finished product was that he worked to produce. His own importance in its production was frequently buried. The immigrant was also intimidated bv the largeness and impersonality of the citv in which he lived. Fear, bewilderment, and loneliness magnified his difficulties. The violence and bitterness that became a part of American industrial life sprang from the recognition that there was more involved in the worker's lot than wages or hours. At stake was the very concept of dignity for all human beings and respect for toil. The Doors Close. The immigrants who came to the mines and industrial cities were usually unskilled, if diligent, workers, but the nation needed their services. However, the labor unions, fearing the competition of an unchecked flow of newcomers, repeatedy demanded immigration restrictions. In time they were joined by other groups, particularly those conservative groups who feared the impact of the new immigrant on American ideas and institutions. As a result. Congress was finally persuaded to pass a series of restrictive laws. The Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborers for ten years. It also forbade American citizenship to Chinese born in China. This law was eventually made permanent In 1907 a so- called "Gentleman's Agreement" was negotiated between the United States and Japan that halted the immigration of Japanese laborers. Congress, in 1917, over President Wilson's veto, passed a broader and more important law requiring that all immigrants be able to read and write. The first truly restrictive legislation, however, came with the enactment of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. Even more drastic quota laws were passed in 1924 and 1929. Thus the immigration acts of the 1920's marked the end of an era. The door was not completely closed, but it was cracked only wide enough for a limited few to enter. x. Where did the principal groups of European immigrants originate prior to the 1880's? What changes occurred in the 1890's? 2. How did many Americans react to the "new immigrant?" 3. What were some of the more important measures passed, from the late nineteenth century on, to halt the flow of immigrants to the United States? Applying Science to Agriculture The application of scientific methods to agriculture was an uncommon practice in the United States prior to the Civil War. Typical of the general attitude was the statement in a book on farming published in i860: "No farmer ever yet received any benefit from any analysis of the soil, and it is doubtful if anyone ever will." So long as cheap land was plentiful and labor was in short supply, farmers found it more economical to abandon worn- out soil and transfer their efforts to uncultivated virgin land. There were numerous individuals, nevertheless, with sufficient imagination to recognize that such practices could not continue in a rapidly developing urbanized society. Con- of transcontinental railroads. The building of the railroads made it possible to ship produce from onee-remote farmlands. A third law that greatly affected farmers was the Morrill Act, which provided large tracts of public land to the states to be used for the establishment of at least one college in each public land state. These "land-grant colleges" were to specialize in agriculture and mechanical arts. Many of the best-known universities in die United States today owe their origins to this law. Further recognition of the changing role of agriculture was demonstrated by the federal government in 1862 by the establishment of a Department of Agriculture. The commissioner who headed the department later became the Secretary of Agriculture and a member of the President's cabinet. There were still other factors responsible for the agricultural transformation. The invention of new farm machinery made it possible to grow crops more extensively, particu- gress acted with foresight in 1862 to create a Department of Agriculture and to pass the Morrill Land Grant College Act. Both actions served to further agricultural research and education. The same was true of the Hatch Act of 1887 which established agricultural experiment stations in every' state in the Union. Meanwhile individual research pioneers were attacking special agricultural problems. From a long, illustrious list a few names and contributions will suffice — Mark Alfred Carleton, bringing from Asia a variety of wheat sturdy enough to withstand the harsh weather and plant diseases of the Middle West; David A, Coker, improving upland cotton on his experimental farm in South Carolina; George Washington Carver, the Negro scientist, discovering hundreds of uses for the peanut, soybean, and sweet potato within the confines of his laboratory; Luther Burbank, developing many new plants by cross breeding in his California garden. The development of improved crops and the discovery of ways to combat persistent animal and crop diseases helped to further the revolution in which the American farmer was engaged. larly in the great corn belt of the Middle West and the vast wheat lands of the plains. The rush of new immigrants from i860 on, supplied needed farm labor, as on the dairy' farms of Wisconsin. Also, improvements in the milling of flour opened up farmlands in Minnesota and the Dakotas for the growing of spring wheat. Agriculture also was aided by government experiment stations and scientific laboratories, which developed better seeds, new strains of livestock, and improved fertilizers. Selling American Farm Products Abroad. American farm products, as we have already noted, found their way into overseas markets in colonial times. These shipments, however, could not compare with the export of American farm products during the 1870's, 1880's, and 1890s. By the 1890s, the total value of American farm products shipped abroad was almost equal to the value of products of every kind that the United States was importing from other countries. Even though the The growth of the cities was not only rapid but unplanned. Little consideration had been given to appropriate housing, sanitation, police and fire protection, and education. City governments often became corrupt, and the indulgence of graft encouraged the purchases of special privileges. Part of the problem could be traced to the citizens themselves — many of whom were either indifferent to or lacked a know ledge of how their city was run. New Pressures Disturb Established Citizens. A considerable portion of the urban society of an earlier America had been made up of small, independent businessmen and such professional people as lawyers, clergymen, doctors, and editors. Largely Anglo-Saxon in origin, these groups had long been the nation's leaders in politics and in education. But with the new industrialism came a challenge to their once-established and well-entrenched position. It brought into prominence the heads of great corporations and the leaders of the new labor unions. Also disturbing to many established citizens was the new immigration. The aliens pouring in from central and southern Europe brought cultural patterns that differed greatly from the traditional Anglo-Saxon ways. The old- line Americans observed that the immigrants seemed reluctant to move into the mainstream of city life but instead clustered together in self-conscious ghetto groups. The reactions of these older groups to the rising industrial city — with its social disorder and political problems — were mixed and often contradictory. At times, they showed violent opposition to new industrialists, labor leaders, and alien immigrants, whose standards so contradicted those of the earlier predominantly agrarian society. On other occasions, they blamed themselves for having permitted an imperfect world to arise. This led some of ihe older privileged groups to become deeply interested in reform. 1. What were some of the problems created by the growth of big business? 2. Give facts to explain the inequalities in wealth among the American people. 3. What problems in the growing cities aroused interest in reform movements? The Progressives Launch Protests In a sense, the Progressive movement might be likened to a great national housecleaning effort. To do the job properly, the dirt and cobwebs had first to be located. The areas of abuse had to be exposed. This phase of the movement attracted many helpers from intellectuals, editors, writers, artists, educators, and politicians in the nation. Each, from the standpoint of his special interest, directed a bright light of inquiry into some dusty corner of the environment that needed investigation. They joined hands, believing that progress would be made in the housecleaning effort only through social planning — people working together in groups and with the help of government. The Leadership of Intellectuals. Some American intellectuals were pointing the way to social change many years before the outset of the Progressive Era. One of the first was Henry George, whose clear and provocative Progress and Poverty, published in 1879, analyzed the causes of poverty and described the inequality of wealth in society'. His solution for these ills — which was to levy a "single tax" on the profit from land — was doubtless of little value. Yet, as protest literature, his book had a profound influence, both in the United States and throughout the world, and more than 2,000,000 copies were sold. One of the most important books leading to the Progressive movement was Edward Bellamy's highly successful utopian novel. Looking Backward, which was introduced to the public in 1888. A utopian romance, Bellamy's book looked backward at the 1880's from the year 2000 and, by means of this theme, attacked the social Darwinism of the 1880's and its "instinct of selfishness.'' Thorstcin Veblen's The Theory of the Leisure Class, published in 1899, was another work that gave substance to the aims of the Progressives. In this and later writings, Veblen leveled severe attacks at modem business, which had been created by the laissez-faire, or "hands-off" attitude of government in the nineteenth century. He condemned the wasteful Culver Picture/ Consider Roosevelt's peace efforts in relation to the Great White Fleet The Great White Fleet. In 1907, President Roosevelt sent the battleships and cruisers of the United States Navy — painted a sparkling white — on a round-the-world cruise, primarily to impress Japan. treaty gave Japan a number of territorial concessions in Korea and Manchuria, but the Japanese also wanted the payment of heavy damages. Failure to receive such an indemnity caused deep Japanese resentment against Roosevelt and the signers of the Portsmouth Treaty. Nevertheless, because of his efforts in bringing about a settlement, Roosevelt was awarded the Noire I Peace Prize in 1906. Japanese aggression on the Asian mainland continued to pose a threat to the Open Door policy. At the same time, other types of friction developed between Japan and the United States. In 1906, the San Francisco Board of Education issued an order that excluded Oriental students from city schools attended by Americans and Europeans. The order, aimed primarily at Japanese residents, created so much bitterness in Japan that President Roosevelt found it necessary to step into the controversy and persuade the hoard to repeal its ruling. As a concession in the settlement, Roosevelt promised California a restriction on Japanese immigration. What resulted was a "Gen- tleman's Agreement" reached with Japan in 1907, by which Japan accepted the stipulation that Japanese laborers would not be permitted ft leave Japan for the United States. This highly controversial agreement, which remained in effect for almost two decades, did not entirelv prevent Japanese immigration. In an effort to publicize America's interest m maintaining the Open Door Policy, Roosevelt dispatched the United States fleet on a round-the-world cruise in 1907 to display the nation's growing naval strength. En route, the fleet paid a visit to Japan at the invitation of the Japanese government. This move was followed by another step in American-Japanese relations, when in November, 1908, Secretary of State Elihu Root succeeded in negotiating the Root-Takahira Agreement. By its terms, the two nations agreed to maintain the Open Door and the independence of China and to recognize "the status quo in the Pacific area." Roosevelt Helps to Settle a Crisis in North Africa. In still another effort to preserve world peace, Theodore Roosevelt used the good offices of the United States in the country of Morocco in 1905 and 1906. When Germany and France were unable to settle a dispute over commercial privileges in Morocco, a war seemed imminent. However, the conflicting powers agreed to a conference. In tire Spanish city of Algeciras .in 1906, a treaty was written and accepted by Germany and France, partly as a result of Roosevelt's influence. Mainly, however, it was accepted because of the threat of war in Europe. 1. Indicate some of the contributions of the Hague Tribunal. 1. Why did Roosevelt receive the Nobel Prize? 3. Explain the background of the "Gentleman's Agreement" of 1907. A "Noble Experiment" with Prohibition Fails. The antics of the Jazz Age were often carried on to the accompaniment of illegal liquor produced and smuggled to the public by the notorious "bootlegger." Bootlegging arose as a part of the "noble experiment" with prohibition that began when the Eighteenth Amendment was added to the federal Constitution in January, 1919, and placed in effect a year later. The amendment forbade "the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors ... for beverage purposes. . . ." Prohibition was not new. It had long been practiced on a local option basis in some cities and counties. In addition, 29 states had adopted statewide prohibition by the end of 1918. Now, however, it was a constitutional matter affecting all Americans, and national law-enforcement agencies were thrown into die full-time business of keeping the nation dry. It proved a difficult condition to enforce. Bootlegging became a thriving business. The enormous profits in illegal liquor led to the growth of bootleg gangs which engaged in bloody warfare for control of business outlets. Such outlets might be the corner drugstore, a gas station, or a private individual. One of the most spectacular of the gangland episodes was the St. Valentine's Day Massacre in Chicago in 1929, when gangsters, armed with machine guns, lined members of a rival gang against a wall and mowed them down. Enforcement difficulties and the connection between prohibition and the growth of crime were major factors contributing to the repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment by the adoption of the Twenty-first Amendment. The new amendment went into effect in December, 1933, and marked the end of the "noble experiment" to regulate the nation's social habits. Religious Fundamentalists Take a Stand. Among the leaders in the prohibition movement were the religious fundamentalists, those who insisted that the language of the Bible must be accepted as literal truth. They were also concerned with the teachings of modern science which they regarded as contrary to biblical teachings. Fundamentalists were particularly vigorous in denouncing the Darwinian concept of biological development, even though many outstanding churchmen had long since reconciled it with the teachings of Christianity. The Darwinian controversy entered the legal realm in 1925 when the Tennessee legislature passed a law making it illegal to teach any theory of creation that denied the account in the Book of Genesis. John T. Scopes, a young high school biology teacher in the east Tennessee town of Dayton, decided to challenge the law' by using a biology text published bv American Book Company which explained Darwin's ideas. He was arrested and brought to trial. The American Civil Liberties Union supplied him with lawyers — among them Clarence Darrow, one of the most famous attorneys of the day. In its prosecution of Scopes, the state had equally famous assistance in the person of William Jennings Bryan, himself a staunch fundamentalist. The so-called "monkey trial" in the hot summer of 1925 focused national attention on the little town of Dayton. At the height of the trial, Bryan look the witness stand to explain some of his particular interpretations of the Scriptures. In the end, Scopes was convicted of violating the law, but the state Supreme Court reversed the action of the low'er court because of a technicality. The law remained on the statute lawks of Tennessee, and other states passed similar laws, but they went unchallenged in the courts. New Immigration Policies Alter America's Historic Role. No social issue in the twenties had more far-reaching consequences for American life than the changing immigration policy. For the first time in the nation's history, a series of congressional acts almost closed the doors completely to peoples from other lands. From the more than 1,000,000 immigrants who entered the United States in 1905, the number dropped to less than 300,- 000 in 1925. The first important law to stem immigration came in 1917, when Congress passed, over President Wilson's veto, a law that barred immigrants who could not read and write. The Quota Act of 1921 was a more extreme measure. It limited to each nation — except those in the Western Hemisphere — a quota of 3 percent of the number of individuals of that nationality living in the United States in 1910. The National Origins Act of 1924 was even more stringent. It restricted immigration to 2 percent of a given nationality living in the United States in 1890. Finally, in 1929, the 1924 quota was replaced by a clause fixing quotas to nationalities based on their individual proportion to the total population in 1920. These laws therefore favored immigrants from northern ami western Europe, while discriminating against those from southern and eastern Europe. Most Orientals had been already barred. Most Americans defended the new laws on the basis that continued unrestricted immigration would help to weaken the nation's institutions and traditions. It was a program supported by progressives and conservatives alike. In sharply reducing the rate of population increase, the restrictions lowered competition for jobs and thus helped to raise wage levels. But the blessing was not unmixed, for the same influence also reduced the nation's rate of economic growth because fewer immigrants meant fewer consumers of the nation's products. Furthermore, the bars to migration also contributed to greater instability in heavily populated European countries. Labor Unioits Lose Ground. Organized labor was beset with woes during the twenties despite seeming gains through immigration policies. At the close of World War I, membership in American labor unions numbered more than 5,000,000. But the gains of the war years were lost in the decade that followed. By 1929, union membership had dropped to 3,600,000. Spectacular strikes in the steel and coal industries in 1919 marked the beginning of labor's loss of influence. As the twenties progressed, additional strikes — coupled with aggressive employer tactics and the unfriendly attitude of government — further contributed to unionism's growing woes. In the early 1930's a special investigating committee of the United States Senate discovered that the chief business of some 230 private detective agencies was to provide labor spies and strikebreakers. Employers gained further advantage through the organization of "company unions." A company union was an organisation of the workers within a given company and was often controlled by the employer. Their purpose was to prevent outside unions from gaining a foothold. There was also a general effort among employers' organizations to further the idea of an "open shop." An open shop is a plant or industry in which a worker docs not have to join a labor union in order to be eligible for a job. The United States Supreme Court was as unfriendly in its labor attitude as it was friendly toward business consolidation. It ruled unconstitutional two child-labor laws and a minimum-wage law for women. It upheld the principle of "yellow-dog" contracts, which were contracts by which workers had to agree not to join a union in order to obtain employment in an industry. However, trade-union losses could not be explained completely by antiunion forces or unfriendly government. The fact was that many workers believed they were doing well without organization. Operating on a principle that came to be known as "welfare capitalism," many employers raised wages, shortened hours, and provided such benefits as vacations with pay and more favorable work rules. Behind the new philosophy was the presumption that better-satisfied workers, with more time and money, would resist the pressure of labor organizers. They would also contribute, through their spending, to an expanding economy. Conflicts within organized labor further contributed to union decline. The AFL, in particular, was the scene of numerous power struggles between the backers of aggressive tactics and those leaders who believed in cautious movement. These moderates, who included such men as Samuel Gompers and William Green, managed to retain control so that the union policies were set by the craft unions which favored a conservative course. Depression Plagues the Farmers. Union difficulties were more than matched by the problems of agriculture. The wartime prosperity based on a stepped-up demand for goods at home and abroad came to an abrupt end in 1920, largely because of the decreasing foreign demand. The resulting economic slump continued into 1921. TTie hard times caused many business failures, and some 5,000,000 workers were unemployed. While American A month after the Hiss conviction, the arrest, in London, of Dr. Klaus Fuchs, a prominent British physicist, added to the growing national anxiety about spies and subversives. It developed that Fuchs had obtained important atomic information in the United States and relayed it to the Soviet L'nion. The activities of Fuchs led investigators to a group of Americans working as agents for the Soviet LTnion: Ilarrv Cold, David Greenglass, and Ethel and Julius Rosenberg. Gold was tried as an American associate of Fuchs and given a long prison sentence. Greenglass, working as a machinist in the atomic installation at Los Alamos, Mew Mexico, was convicted for supplying atomic data to his sister, Ethel Rosenberg, and her husband Julius. The Rosenborgs were found guilty of active Soviet espionage and were executed in June, 1953. The Spectre of McCarthyism. No exploitation of the public concern over disloyal tv was quite the match of that by a ignited States senator from Wisconsin. Joseph R. McCarthy. The senator, in a speech at Wheeling, West Virginia, in February, 1950, asserted that he held in his hand a list of Communists who were then working in the Department of State. (Reports varied as to whether the Senator claimed his list contained 57, 81, 205, or just "a lot" of names.) McCarthy further insisted that Secretary of State Dean Acheson knew of these Communists. These sensational charges led to an immediate Senate investigation. After extensive hearings, the Senate committee concluded that McCarthy's charges were a "fraud and a hoax." The committee report, far from putting an end to the matter, only served to encourage McCarthy in his bulldozing tactics. He helped to defeat the committee chairman, Senator Tydings of Maryland, in the 1950 election. He accused the State Department of betraying China and causing the fall of the Chiang Kai- shek government. In speech after speech, he leveled accusations of Communist influence in government from the highest officials to the lowest clerks. The Senator's activities over a four-year period added a word to our language, "McCarthyism." McCarthvism came to mean attacks on individuals and groups with charges so gross and complicated, and yet so difficult to pin down with specifics, that they were difficult to deny by the use of rational means. The McCarran-Walter Immigration Act of June, 1952, was another internal security measure which had overtones of McCarthyism. It required complicated loyalty checks on foreign visitors to the United States and established new immigration procedures. But it also repealed the provision of the 1924 immigration law that prevented Orientals from becoming American citizens. Otherwise, the new law continued national origin restrictions favorable to immigrants from northern and western Europe. The Truman Years Close with Internal Dissension. The Truman administration during its closing years was burdened with the Korean War, spy trials, and McCarthyism. Its resulting loss of popular support was revealed by the outcome of congressional elections in 1950 in which Republican candidates made important gains. Confidence in the administration was further shaken by some revelations of dishonesty and corruption in government. A congressional investigation in 1951 exposed graft and "influence-peddling" in the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Similar evidences of misconduct were subsequently exposed in the Internal Revenue Service and in the Department of Justice. Even more dramatic revelations were provided by a Senate Crime Committee, under the chairmanship of Estes Kefauver of Tennessee, that laid bare to television audiences across the nation the political power and influence on big cities of organized crime. The President himself was slow to respond to the revelations of corruption. Eventually he did make moves designed to clean up some of the federal agencies, including a proposal to Congress for the reorganization of the Bureau of Internal Revenue. 1. Why did the Tnmian administration become involved in loyalty checks? 2. Define "McCarthyism" and indicate the source of the word. August 14, 1973, in response to an act of Congress, the last U. S. bornb was dropped in Cambodia. Thus ended the direct involvement of the United States in the long and costly ordeal in Indo-China. There was, nevertheless, con- tinning American support in the form of financial assistance to the government of South Vietnam and to government forces in Cambodia. Establishing New Relations with the Communist World. While pursuing his Vietnam policy. President Nixon, early in 1970, set forth a new foreign policy. Termed the Nixon Doctrine, the policy pledged, in the President's words, ''that the United States will participate in the defense and development of allies and friends, but... America cannot —and will not — conceive all the plans, design all the programs, execute all the decisions and undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world." Armed with his new ]X)licyr, the President announced in 1971 that he would visit Mainland China and the Soviet Union in the first state visits by an American President to either country. Later in 1971 the government announced that it would no longer oppose seating Mainland China in the United Nations, but it urged that Nationalist China be permitted to retain membership. In October, however, the American two-China policy was defeated in the LI. N. General Assembly, and the Communist delegate was seated as the sole Chinese representative. In February, 1972, after careful planning by his personal envoy, Dr. I lenry Kissinger, President Nixon and his official party spent a week in Mainland China. It was a period marked by a series of private conferences, public banquets. and sight-seeing tours. At the close of the visit, the President and the Chinese Premier issued a joint communique which emphasized the need for increased contact between China and the United States. The following May, President Nixon spent a similar week in the Soviet Union. Here, the result was a series of agreements with the Russian leaders having to do with strategic arms limitations, joint space missions, medical research, trade, technology, the environment, and incidents at sea. 1. What were some of the more interesting characteristics ol the 1968 presidential election? 