LongloTromesNova Sthe Havé?e. Codchotherdandy itcTN IAOrdermericanHr BerasZCistorySECOND EDITIONAMERICAN HISTORY8TH GRADEHVolume IADDISON . WESLEY PUBLISHERS92to 1877A12703EREBECCA BROOKS GRUVER,ITextDate1/11979Copyright C 1976, 1972 by Addison-Wesley PublishingCompany, Inc. Philippines copyright 1976 by Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Inc.All rights reserved. No part of this publication may bereproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the priorwritten permission of the publisher. Printed in theUnited States of America. Published simultaneously inCanada. Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 75-14794.ISBN 0-201-02739-9EFGHIJKLM-DO-7987Contents1 The Meeting of Two Worlds4 Prelude to IndependenceThe Aztecs of Mexico2Eighteenth-Century Politics108The Incas of Peru3The Wars for Empire111The Indians of North America3Britain's New Empire118Indian Contributions to European Culture7From Discord to Disunion126Exploration7Competition for America155 The Emergence of a NationThe European Background17England: The Mother CountryThe Revolutionary War14625Creating a Nation160The Confederation Period1672 Colonizing the New WorldBeginnings on the Chesapeake336Life in the Chesapeake Bay Area40Founding a New GovernmentThe Constitutional Convention184The Founding of New England45The Proprietary Grants54Ratification190The Development of an Empire61The New Government196The Rise of Political Parties2133 Shaping an Identity747The Jeffersonians in PowerThe Southern ColoniesThe Middle Colonies80Domestic Changes228The New England Colonies84The Westward Movement232The FrontierInternational Problems24188Conflicts Among the Colonies89Madison as President246The Impact of Religion92The War of 1812251The Secular Mind98Peace and Postwar Diplomacy257viiviiiContents8Social and Economic PatternsPolk's Administration43318of the Young RepublicFurther Westward Expansion438The Mexican War442The Postwar Culture266FaThe Election of 1848449The Changing Economy272THSectionalism and the New Territories450The Supreme Court under John Marshall285InIn9 The Emergence of Sectional14The 1850s: The GatheringStrainsStorm19Good Times and Bad296Pierce Becomes President457The Slavery Issue303The Decline of Manifest Destiny462THSectional Politics309Buchanan Becomes President465LaThe Adams Administration312The Congressional Elections of 1858470T1The Election of 186047310 The Jacksonian Era20Secession477Jackson Takes Command318Lincoln Takes Command481TtJacksonian Politics322NSectional Controversy32915The Civil WarEdThe Bank War334The Two Sides Take Shape494PoThe New Two-Party System342Factors in the War Effort4985062111 Conditions of Life in the Mid-1861-1862 CampaignsThe Emancipation Proclamation513Ponineteenth Century1863-1865: The War Grinds to an End516CThe Growth of the West352The Election of 1864520TtCommercial Expansion361TlAgricultural Expansion365TIIndustrial Growth37516Reconstructing the UnionPresidential Reconstruction Plans5262212 Religion, Romanticism, andCongressional Reconstruction Plans530T1ReformGrant's Presidency540TlThe Religious and Philosophical Background391The South After Reconstruction547TILiterature395AThe Visual Arts401TlReform Movements40517The Conquest of the GreatC.WestTI13Mid-nineteenth CenturyCoercion of the Indians559Expansion: Manifest DestinyGold Fever57323Origins of the Expansionist Movement424Cattle Fever576TIAnnexation of Texas428The Farmer's Last Frontier578TixContents18Becoming a Great IndustrialThe National Mood for Reform736PowerThe Roosevelt Administration738Factors in IndustrializationThe Taft Administration744591The Railroad EraWilson Becomes President748592Industrialization and Consolidation598Progressivism in Perspective754Industrialization in the New South60919 The Social and Economic24 World War I and the LeagueResponse to Industrialismof NationsAmerica's Decision for War764The New Immigration616The Home Front775Labor Conditions622The United States Becomes an Urban NationThe Military Front781632The Paris Peace Conference78720 The Intellectual Response toAmerican Response to the Treaty792IndustrialismThe Philosophy of Pragmatism64225The 1920sNew Directions in the Social Sciences645The Postwar Transition798Education650Republican Ascendancy803Popular Culture and Art655An Era of Prosperity80721 Politics in the Gilded AgeThe Jazz Age813The Election of 1928820Politics in the Late Nineteenth Century671Conservative Control673The Politics of Agriculture68126The Depression and the NewThe Depression of the 1890s687DealThe Silver Issue689The Ordeal of Herbert Hoover824The First New Deal83122Becoming a World Power

The New Deal Turns Left841The Late Nineteenth Century696The Climax of the New Deal846The Imperialism of the 1890s699The Spanish-American War705Acquisition of the Philippines71127From Isolation to InterventionThe Panama Canal715The Retreat from Responsibility860Caribbean Policy716The Good Neighbor Policy862The Open Door Policy722The Threat of Totalitarianism864The Road to War86823 The Progressive EraAmerican Mobilization879The Progressive Profile730War Against the Axis882The Progressive Movement in Cities and States 733War with Japan888xContents28President Truman and thePresidents, Vice-Presidents, and CabinetNCold War YearsMembersA-30MTruman's Domestic PoliciesN900The End of Allied Unity905Photo CreditsA-36NAmerican Foreign PolicyIn910Fear of SubversionIndexLe920I-118The Republicans Return to Power923WSpecial FeaturesW29Eisenhower The Politics ofNew Worlds68UModerationWritten with a Sunbeam: Women in theCThe Eisenhower Style928American Revolution140MDomestic Issues930Dark Eagle: The Rise and Fall of BenedictElForeign IssuesArnold940178ElNative American Democracy222IrAmerica in the 1960sEarly American Industry, Invention, and1830Science290ElThe Kennedy Years959What Hath God Wrought? The AmericanUJohnson's Presidency971Telegraph System, 1844-1866383ARapid Change and Violent Protest980Let My People Go: The Life of Harriet Tubman489SIReconstruction and Education: The First Civil18Rights Movement55331The 1970s: Years of TrialWBlack Harlem: The First Thirty Years665The Election of 1968o992Scandal in the National Game: A TurningDomestic Policies Under NixonPoint in Baseball HistoryT996757Nixon's Foreign PolicyN1003Early Television: Creating a NationalThe War on Dissent1010Neighborhood854CWatergate1012After the World War Before the Cold War895KThe Ford Succession1017The American History of Yap953EDissenting VoicesT1019Epilogue1021MapsNENorth American Indian Tribes6RAppendixVoyages of Discovery9EFurther ReadingsA-1Religious Groups, Sixteenth Century Europe22EThe Declaration of IndependenceA-14Early Colonial Land Grants, 1606 to 162042LThe Constitution of the United StatesA-15Early Colonial Land Grants, 1620 to 163943Presidential ElectionsA-24Colonial Economy77Date of StatehoodA-28Colonial Settlements by Nationalists, 177082Population of the United StatesA-29Colonial Overseas Trade86Chief Justices of the United States SupremeFrench and Indian War115CourtA-29North America, 17131192The Meeting of Two WorldsPeople began migrating westward from AsiaOne group is thought to have come frominto the Americas before the dawn of recordedT7present-day Japan to the coast of Ecuador inhistory. Estimates of the first arrivals vary fromabout 3000 B.C., bringing pottery and perhaps12,000 to 35,000. years ago, but most expertsdomesticated cotton. Still later, some of the firstWhagree that these first immigrants came acrossAsians who sailed to the Polynesian islands mayPerthe Bering Strait. They were probably able tohave come further east, arriving in the Westernancome on foot, traveling across a land bridgeHemisphere between A.D. 500 and 1000.arewhich connected Siberia with Alaska. AccordingBy the fifteenth century there were millionspireto current theories, this land bridge was sub-of people in the Americas, and they had orga-200merged at the end of the last Ice Age, aboutnized themselves into many different politicalAm10,000 years ago. At this time, all overland pas-units. Some of the civilizations were primitive,cultsage came to a halt.but others were among the most advanced cul-zatiSome anthropologists believe that later trav-tures in the world.1elers sailed to the Americas across the Pacific.in 1aquthenatwhThe Aztecs of MexicoachandOne of the most advanced Indian cultures wascity of this size, the Aztecs had to use sophisti-brathat of the Aztecs who rose to power in centralcated agricultural techniques, such as irrigationornMexico in the fifteenth century. When a Span-and terracing. However, neither they nor any ofdiffish army of conquest led by Hernando Cortezthe other tribes of the New World had dis-Iarrived in 1519, they found a flourishing civili-covered the wheel and its uses. Because horseszation of over five million people. The Aztecsdid not exist in the Western Hemisphere untilpresided over a loosely administered empire.they were introduced by the Europeans, mostFor the most part, other tribes living in terri-transport depended on human beings or boats.T1tories controlled by the Aztecs were left aloneas long as they paid tribute and traded onquello faumeÍacqua nella cindMofavorable terms.to 1The Aztecs inherited much of their technicalAnacubasphknow-how from the Mayas, an earlier CentralaboAmerican civilization. Thanks to these remark-theable predecessors, the Aztecs possessed a systemimpof hieroglyphic writing and astronomical knowl-tereedge so precise that their priests were able tozatpredict eclipses and devise an accurate calendar.AmThey were also advanced in other arts and sci-varences, including mathematics, pottery, sculp-of Iture, and architecture. The Aztec capital,froTenochtitlan, covered about eight square milesreliof the area that is now Mexico City. It hadAmabout sixty thousand citizens, and was builtwharound a pyramid 200 feet high. To support aTefgeelikeriteMexico City in 1528.son

3The Indians of North AmericaThe Incas of PeruWhen the Spanish conquistadores arrived innated by the emperor and his family. All prop-Peru in the sixteenth century, they also founderty was owned by the government or the statean advanced civilization there. The rulers of thisreligious organization. Every aspect of life, fromarea were the Incas, who controlled a vast em-public health to the transportation of food frompire of seven million people that extended someone end of the empire to the other, was con-2000 miles along the Pacific coast of Southtrolled by the ruling family which presided overAmerica. The Incas had possessed an advancedits holdings with great ceremony. Surroundedculture, equal in complexity to any of the civili-by numerous wives and servants, Inca rulerszations of Europe or Asia, since about 200 B.C.wore gold and silver and were carried about onLike the Aztecs, the Incas were sophisticatedlitters.in the area of agriculture. They built extensiveTo maintain their authority over conqueredaqueducts and irrigation systems, and enrichedareas, the Incas used harsh and dictatorial meth-their crops with fertilizer. They were the origi-ods, including forcibly uprooting troublemakersnators of many edible plants, including theand moving them elsewhere. The Inca language,white potato. Textile weaving was anothercustoms, and religion were imposed on the entireachievement of South American culture. Llamaempire, and the historical traditions of subju-and alpaca wools were woven, embroidered, andgated peoples were obliterated. The totalitari-braided into fabrics. The material was thenanism of the Inca empire helps explain theirornamented with designs dyed as many as 190defeat by the Spanish conquistadores. Once thedifferent hues on a single piece of cloth.head was overthrown, administration brokePolitically, the Inca civilization was domi-down rapidly throughout the whole empire.The Indians of North AmericaMost anthropologists believe that of the fifteenOF all the Indian cultures of the Unitedto twenty million Indians in the Western Hemi-States, perhaps the most advanced in Westernsphere at the time of Columbus' arrival, onlyterms when the Europeans arrived were theabout one million were living in what is nowtribes of the American Southwest--the Hopis,the United States and Canada. There were manythe Zunis, and the Pueblos. These Indians wereimportant differences among all the tribes scat-peace-loving, farming people. They lived intered over this immense area, but a few generali-stone or adobe (dried mud) homes which almostzations can be made. The Indians of Northhad the look of modern apartments. Built intoAmerica tended to be less technologically ad-cliff walls or at the top of steep plateaus, somevanced than the Aztecs or the Incas. Their formsof the structures were four stories high andof political organization were also very differentlooked down upon spacious streets and squares.from their neighbors to the south, as were theirCollectively, these tribes are known as thereligious practices. For example, most NorthPueblo people, after the Spanish word pueblo,American Indians believed in a Great Spiritmeaning town. So community-minded were thewhich pervaded the universe, and were morePueblos that wealth was divided equally amonglikely to practice healing ceremonies than theall residents. No distinctions of possessions,rites of human sacrifice and self-torture used bywork, or prestige were allowed among the mem-some of the Mexican and South American tribes.bers of any village.

81The Middle ColoniesLAND SPECULATIONeighteenth centuries. The South had an ampleThousands of people in the Middle colonies, nosupply of slave labor with which the immigrantsmatter how honest or how poor, were consumedcould not compete, and Puritan intolerance andby land fever. As one New York observer com-exclusivity tended to discourage newcomers tomented:New England.In 1700 the population of America was aboutAn unaccountable thirst for large tracts of250,000. By the 1760s it had increased to almostland without the design of cultivation hath2,000,000, about one-third of whom had beenprevailed over the inhabitants of this and theborn abroad. Most of the newest arrivals wereneighboring provinces with a singular rage.from non-English backgrounds, but they werePatents have been lavishly granted (to give ithardly the first such immigrants to America.no worse term) upon the pretense of fair In-When the British annexed New York in 1664,dian purchases, some of which the Indiansthey had inherited a settlement originally estab-have alleged were never made but forged.lished by the Dutch. Danes, Finns, and SwedesThey say that the surveyors have frequentlyhad settled in the Delaware Valley in the seven-run patents vastly beyond even the pretendedteenth century, and in 1683 William Pennconditions or limits of sale.persuaded a group of Germans to come toPennsylvania, where they founded Germantown,As in the South, land in the Middle coloniesnorth of Philadelphia. So the eighteenth-centurywas distributed by the headright system whichnon-English immigrants were part of a well-demanded that all the land a person claimed hadestablished tradition.to be cleared, planted, and lived on. In Penn-The early arrivals were a trickle compared tosylvania and New Jersey the system workedthe deluge that flooded America after 1713,smoothly, but in New York it broke downhowever. Impoverished by wars on the Conti-and became a cover for dishonest speculationnent and hounded by religious persecution,and corruption. Through political cronyism,thousands of Germans were among the immi-huge estates were granted, even though the legalgrants of the early eighteenth century. Some oflimit was 2000 acres.them went to New York at first, but whenLand speculators in New York sometimes re-reports of the restrictions on landholding weresold their enormous holdings, but more oftenprinted in German newspapers, German immi-they rented out small parcels to tenant farmers.grants began to avoid that colony. This helps toThe terms of the rental could include additionalexplain why New York's population increasedobligations reminiscent of feudalism. For in-very slowly during the 1700s.stance, land might be leased for ten bushels ofAlmost half of the Germans who came to thewheat, "four fat hens," and a few days' workcolonies eventually settled in Pennsylvania,on the landlord's own property. The landlordswhere they became known as the Pennsylvaniaalso reserved all milling and mineral rights forDutch. The name Dutch was an English mispro-themselves, and sometimes even establishednunciation of the German word for German,private court systems on their property.Deutsch. Pennsylvania attracted the immigrantsbecause it promised almost complete religiousfreedom, a generous land policy, and soil thatIMMIGRATIONwas so similar to Germany's that newcomersThe Middle colonies tended to absorb most ofcould farm the same way they had in Europe.A minority of the Germans were members ofthe non-English immigrants to the New World,strict religious sects such as the Mennonitesespecially in the late seventeenth and early(Amish), Moravians, and Dunkards, who wished82Shaping an IdentityQUEBECMontraalMAINE(To Mase.)LakeChamplainN.H.Lake OntarioOswegoPortamouthNEW YORKAlbanysFalem3MASS.BostonCONN.FLLCape Cod-NowporPENNSYLVANIANew.YorkNEW JERSEYAPhitadelphiacsBaitimoroDELAWAREVIRGINIAChesapeake BayNorfolkATLANTIC OCEANNORTH CAROLINAEnglishChariotteScotch-Irish-WilmingtonSOUTH CAROLINAScotch HighlandersAugustaDutchGeorgetownCPGermans and SwissGEORGIACharlestownNegroesSavannahFrenchFrench HuguenotsJews0300SwedesMilesWelshCOLONIAL SETTLEMENT BY NATIONALITIES 177083The Middle Coloniesto avoid contact with the rest of the world. Theterian Scots who had moved to northern Irelandvast majority, however, quickly threw them-early in the seventeenth century. They becameselves into commerce and politics. Many wereknown as the Scotch-Irish, and they left thecraftsmen whose skill far surpassed the abilitiesBritish Isles following a series of economic andof most Anglo-American settlers. It was partlypolitical disasters. First, Parliament outlawedbecause of these German immigrants that Phila-the importation of Irish beef and wool intodelphia was the largest and richest city in the

England, and in 1704 it barred Presbyterianscolonies by the time of the Revolution.from holding public office. Then in 1714 a hor-Another substantial wave of immigrants inrible drought struck northern Ireland. Four yearsthe early 1700s came from Ireland. A few wereof bad crops followed, and in 1717 landlords ofof pure Irish ancestry, but most were Presby-Irish properties doubled or trebled their rents.Life in Urban AmericaThe Small Farmer"[Philadelphia] must certainly be the object of"None of my ancestors, on either side, wereevery one's wonder and admiration. It is situatedeither rich or great, but had the character ofupon a tongue of land, a few miles above thehonesty and industry, by which they lived inconfluence of the Deleware and Schuilkill: andcredit among their neighbors, free from realcontains about 3,000 houses, and 18 or 20,000want, and above the frowns of the world.zinhabitants. It is built north and south upon theMeat, bread and milk was the ordinary food ofbanks of the Delaware; and is nearly two milesall my acquaintance. I suppose the richer sortin length, and three quarters of one in breadth.might make use of those and other luxuries, butThe streets are laid out with great regularity into such people I had no access. We wereparallel lines, intersected by others at rightaccustomed to look upon, what were calledangles, and are handsomely built: on each sidegentle folks, as beings of a superior order. Forthere is a pavement of broad stones for foot pas-my part, I was quite shy of them, and kept offsangers; and in most of them a causeway in theat a humble distance. A periwig, in those days,middle for carriages, Upon dark nights it is wellwas a distinguishing badge of gentle folk-andlighted, and watched by a patrole: there arewhen I saw a man riding the road, near ourmany fair houses and public edifices in it.house, with a wig on, it would so alarm myThe city is in a very flourishing state, and in-fears, and give me such a disagreeable feeling,habited by merchants, artists, tradesmen, andthat, I dare say, I would run off, as for my life.persons of all occupations. There is a publicSuch ideas of the difference between gentle andmarket held twice a week, upon Wednesday andsimple, were, I believe, universal among all ofSaturday, almost equal to that of Leadenhall;my rank and age.and a tolerable one every day besides. TheDevereux Jarratt,streets are crowded with people, and the riverThe Life of the Reverend Devereux Jarratt,with vessels."1794Andrew Burnaby,Travels through the Middle Settlements inNorth America in the years 1759 and 176084Shaping an IdentityThis was the final blow and thousands offarmers in the Middle colonies carried on theirballScotch-Irish began to leave for America.civic duties through much larger, looser govern-NeiAt first they headed for New England, butmental units: counties. This was a practiceoffithe Puritans gave them a cold reception. Onesimilar to that of the Southern colonies.intePuritan minister saw the new arrivals as "for-About once a month, farmers would ride toto 1midable attempts of Satan and his Sons tothe county courthouse to vote, take part in drillstersunsettle us." Soon, like the Germans, theyof the local militia, or pursue legal business.themoved into Pennsylvania. From there, theyOnce a year those who met the property qualifi-proslowly pushed west to the Appalachian Moun-cation also elected representatives to sit in thetiontains and into the Southern uplands, becomingcolonial assembly. The county courthouse wasreeAmerica's most rugged frontier people.the site where births, deaths, and marriages wereregistered; wills and deeds were recorded; andlicenses were issued for various businesses. TheFACOUNTIEScounty judges were important regional authori-AIn Europe farmers generally lived in villages. Inties who had much to say about an area's growthhoAmerica, with the exception of New England,and development through their power to permitchifarms were scattered far apart and separated bythe building of new roads or the opening of newoftvast forested areas. Since there were few towns,ferry lines.extmaAsnetiaThe New England ColoniespabeOF the three main regions along the Atlanticsquatting by settlers, in New England theuscoast, New England was the most closely knit.process was orderly, legal, and community-thBy the middle of the eighteenth century theminded. Virgin lands were granted not to indi-W.region had a population of 500,000, very littleviduals but to groups of settlers. This meant thatorof which was drawn from the more recent wavesnew immigrants to the area were automaticallyof immigration. During the entire pre-Revolu-organized into towns. A group usually receivedagtionary era, New England remained predomi-a five-square-mile tract to settle a town. Nearthnantly Puritan in religious outlook and Englishthe center of the tract the citizens erected a01in ethnic background. OF course there werevillage around a town square. Here all theWsignificant differences among the various off-farmers and their families lived in a true com-clshoots of Calvinism which sometimes led tomunity, with a church and a school. The landlasharp disputes. Nevertheless, the area still pos-around the village was divided into farms, pas-dsessed a more unified regional character thantures, and woodlands. Farms were parceled outitany other part of America.to each family, but pastures and timberlandslaSimilarities of religious and national back-were held in common by the village.Sground were only part of New England's distinc-The pattern of organization based on townslitive personality. Another factor which promotedencouraged a lively participation in local gov-Sregional unity was the method by which unset-ernment affairs. All adult male members of thePtled land was distributed. Unlike the areas whichtownship were able to vote on municipal issues,ahad a great deal of land speculation or illegalbut citizen involvement went well beyond the€

90Shaping an IdentityMassachusetts prided himself and his "country-frontier people pushed into the back country ofmen" on their "purer English blood, less mixedVirginia in the 1730s, the Carolinas in the nextwith Scotch, Irish, Dutch, French, Danish,two decades, and Georgia in the 1760s. UnlikeSwedish, etc. than any other."the wealthier Anglicans living in Charleston orAs a result of these and other differencesJamestown, the newcomers were usually Pres-there was little cooperation among the colonies.byterians or German Pietists. Often the judges,Maryland tried to undersell Virginia in the to-sheriffs, and other officials of English back-bacco trade. New York, New Jersey, Virginia,ground appointed to administer the new coun-and Pennsylvania all refused to help New En-ties frankly despised the Germans and thegland during a series of French-provoked IndianScotch-Irish. This led them to serve only theattacks in 1703. Only five years later did Newinterests of the governor and the eastern cliqueYork finally offer any aid to the beleagueredof well-to-do merchants and large plantationNew Englanders, and it did so because someowners.New Yorkers realized that they might gainOne sort of political injustice was the con-control of the western fur trade if New Francetrol exercised by the seaboard counties overand her Indian allies were crushed. Border dis-each colony's assembly, which denied fair rep-putes were also a frequent occurrence betweenresentation to the back country. In 1760, forcolonies. The settlers of the Carolinas andexample, Lancaster County in western Pennsyl-Georgia, for instance, had several bitter quar-vania had twice as many people as Bucksrels over trading rights with the Cherokees andCounty in the east, but Bucks had twice asChickasaws.many representatives. In Virginia and the Caro-linas, discrimination against the frontier waseven more unfair. At the time of the Revolu-tion, the older counties there still elected two-EASTERN AND WESTERN CONFLICTSthirds of the members of the assembly.In the decades immediately before the Amer-The sharpest disagreements, however, were feltican Revolution, an observer might have pre-between the eastern and western regions withindicted that a war between easterners and west-each colony. Although the frontier in colonialerners was more likely than a united colonialtimes was seldom more than 100 miles inland,effort against England. Tempers flared in fron-the distance "was sufficient to generate hostility.tier counties and rhetoric became heated. OnePeople living in the back country faced differ-frontiersman denounced the eastern ruling classent problems and had different needs fromas "cursed hungry Caterpillars, that will eat outthose who lived in the more settled areas. West-the very Bowels of our Commonwealth, if theyerners wanted the government to spend moneyare not pulled down from their Nests in a veryon new roads and strong fortifications againstshort time." In North Carolina a group of smallthe Indians. Usually the pioneers were poorerfarmers in the west decided to actually "pullthan the town dwellers and resented the highdown the Caterpillars' in order to end politicalprices on goods and the high rates of interestcorruption. In 1771 some two thousand fron-on loans set by eastern merchants.tiersmen banded together and engaged in a bat-In many colonies these conflicts were inten-tle with the governor's militia. The Regulators,sified by differences in national origin. Theas the westerners called themselves, were de-great immigration of the first half of the eigh-feated, but their resentment against corrupt offi-teenth century brought thousands of Germanscials, high taxes, and underrepresentation con-and Scotch-Irish to Pennsylvania. These ruggedtinued.

217The Rise of Political Partieshuge bribe (Talleyrand's personal fortune hadWhen he saw what a tempest he had stirred up,been depleted by the Revolution and he hopedhe quickly backed down. One of Adams' minis-to replenish it at America's expense). Theters in Europe reported that France was dailyFrench also demanded an apology from thebecoming more conciliatory. Talleyrand humblypresident for remarks criticizing the Frenchassured the president's son, John Quincy Adams,Revolution, as well as a large loan. "No, no, notthat an American envoy to Paris would "un-1sixpence," declared Commissioner Charlesdoubtedly be received with the respect due toPinckney.the representative of a free, independent andAdams decided that France's demands shouldpowerful nation."be exposed to the American public. He releasedMeanwhile the Hamiltonian wing of thethe commissioners' reports, and Pinckney's mildpresident's own party was clamoring for a dec-retort was quickly magnified into the overblownlaration of war. And the members of Adams'slogan, "Millions for defense, but not one centcabinet, who were all under Hamilton's influ-for tribute!" Some Federalists, who feared theence, echoed the cry. Adams, however, recog-French Revolution and sympathized withnized that declaring war against France wouldBritain, seized upon the news as a pretext forcancel out the advantages of neutrality. He feltdemanding war with France.that there were no legitimate grounds forThe Jeffersonians, until now strongly pro-declaring such a war and that peace was alwaysFrench, at first refused to believe Adams. Theypreferable to an unnecessary war.demanded to see the commission's papers, toPutting patriotism over popularity with hiswhich Adams willingly agreed. The documentsparty, Adams appointed a new three-man com-substantiated France's guilt. Then, Jeffersoniansmission to deal with France. The commissionjoined Federalists, and both agreed to repudiatereached a compromise in the Convention ofAmerica's treaties with France, suspend all trade1800: the United States was formally releasedwith France, establish a navy department, andfrom the encumbering Alliance of 1778 andiuthorize attacks by American vessels on Frenchagreed, in return, to stop demanding Frenchwarships and privateers.payment for the losses to American commerce.Washington was prevailed upon to come outifretirement and command the army. Hamilton,THE ALIEN AND SEDITION ACTSdelighted at this turn of affairs, was made sec-and in command at the old general's request.On the domestic front the furor aroused by theFor the next two years France and AmericaXYZ Affair gave the Federalists an opportunityraged an undeclared war on the high seas.to try to silence political opposition. In JuneThe French were anxious to avoid a full-and July 1798 Congress passed several lawsliedged war with the United States. Napoleon'sknown collectively as the Alien and Seditionampaign in North Africa was stalled by theActs. The Naturalization Act increased from fivelitish. Moreover, Napoleon feared that Frenchto fourteen years the period a foreigner had touval attacks on the United States might pro-live in America before qualifying for citizenship.woke an Anglo-American alliance. He thereforeTwo Alien Acts empowered the president toindered Talleyrand to reverse French policy.expel aliens in time of peace or of war if it wasTalleyrand, after all, had only wanted to humil-believed necessary for American security.ate the United States and line his own pockets.The most controversial law was the SeditionAct. This act made it illegal not only to instigatethis 1799 cartoon a multi-headed monster (Talley-a conspiracy against the government, but alsomi) demands money from the American delegatesto publish or even utter any "false, scandalousand malicious" criticism of the government or266Social and Economic Patterns of the Young RepublicAfter the War of 1812 the United States beganleading export. In 1816 and 1817 poor harveststo mature as an independent nation. New tech-in Europe led to an increased demand for Amer-nologies gradually brought the country intoican grain. The West had welcomed 2.2 millioneffective competition with European markets.settlers by 1820, and now outranked New En-Leading politicians sought to use the federalgland in population. During the next decadegovernment to strengthen national unity.new transportation systems (steamboats, roads,In New England new industries reaped hand-and canals) connected the West to the seaboard,some profits, and the Northeast began shiftingand Western agricultural produce found newfrom commerce to manufacturing. In the Southmarkets in the Atlantic coastal states and incotton replaced tobacco and rice as the region'sEurope.The Postwar CultureAMERICANS ON THE MOVEpopulation. Between 1815 and 1820 about 100thousand foreigners emigrated to the UnitedNew England had the largest and most stableStates, most of them settling in the Middle At-population in the country. Most of New Englandlantic states and the West. In the nineteenthhad been settled by 1800. From 1790 to 1820century a restrictive land policy which had dis-the population of Connecticut increased by onlycouraged immigration was generally abandonedten percent, and the population of Rhode IslandThe Iroquois, who had dominated western Newand Massachusetts grew just as slowly.York, were expelled by the turn of the century,The Middle Atlantic states and the West, onand this territory was opened to white settlers.the other hand, experienced sharp increases inBy 1820 New York, which had been the fifthThe Frederick Road, west of Baltimore, was a stage-coach line, a cattle run, and an artery to the West.B

Brooklyn, New York, in 1816,most populous state in 1790, had the largestbegun in the cities. Eighteenth-century Amer-population in the country.ican cities had reflected the comfortable eco-Almost all the cities of the Northeast grewnomic circumstances of the merchants anddramatically with the advent of industrializa-craftsmen who lived there, but in the first de-tion. By 1810 New York City and Philadelphiacades of the nineteenth century large slum areashad become the two largest cities, with popula-began to appear. New York City may havetions of more than 90 thousand each; by 1830boasted of its literary groups and its centers ofthey had more than 150 thousand inhabitantsintellectual life, but it also had slums worse thaneach. Only Boston, which lacked a navigablethose in London. Members of wealthy old Dutchriver connecting it to the West, remained rela-families lived in stately yellow brick houses, buttively stable. During the 1820s the number ofpigs were allowed to forage in the garbage thatAmerican towns with more than 8000 inhabi-littered every public avenue. The city had thetants rose from eleven to forty-four. Most ofwealth of more than a mile of warehouses alongthese towns were in the Northeast.the East River but it also swarmed with thou-In the South the growth of an economy basedsands of penniless immigrants.on the export of cotton affected the growth andAmerican cities were a study in contrast.power of the states. South Carolina and Georgia,Philadelphia was probably the most progressivethe new centers of cotton agriculture, doubledAmerican city of the day, with its well-planned,in population between 1790 and 1820.well-lit, well-paved streets, a good water sup-"Old America seems to be breaking up andply, and handsome houses and public buildings.moving westward," observed an Englishman inBoston offered its citizens similar improvements.1817. In 1810 only one-seventh of the AmericanOn the other hand, no city had an adequatepeople lived west of the Appalachians; thirtysewerage system. Lacking proper treatment fa-years later more than one-third of the country'scilities, cities allowed wastes to run into nearbypopulation had crossed the mountains. Fromrivers, often the same rivers from which they1810 to 1820 the population of Ohio doubleddrew their water. Philadelphia, for example,and by 1840 it had climbed from 230,760 toused the already polluted Delaware River to1,519,467. Other Western states experiencedmeet its water needs. No wonder the city suf-similar influxes of settlers.fered two separate plagues of yellow fever inthe 1790s. The first claimed 4000 lives (moreDECLINE IN THE CITIESthan ten percent of the city's population) andthe second took an additional toll of 3500. Yel-In contrast to the growth of new rural settle-low fever also hit New Haven, Baltimore, Newments, a process of deterioration had alreadyYork, and Boston in the 1790s.328The Jacksonian EraOHIO18291832INDIANA1825ILLINOISUNORGANIZED1825TERRITORY18371840MISSOURIVIRGINIAB.1838Ohio.1825835CHEROKEE *Trail of Tears**KENTUCKYSpringfield1828 CHEROKEEPaducah18281833NORTHNashville.CREEKCAROLINA-ARKANSASTENNESSEE18351837CREEKSEMINOLE-FortMemphiaCHEROKEERogCHICKASAW1820Smith1835CHOCKTAWLittle Rock'CHICKASAWNew EchotaSOUTH1832CAROLINAMISSISSIPPI.CREEKCHOCKTAW1832GEORGIA1830MonroeALABAMAFort MitchellMontgomeryVicksburgAtlanticTEXAS REPUBLICOcear1837-1845LOUISIANAMobileFLORIDA TERRITORYNew1822-1845SOrleansSGULF O F MEXICOSEMINOLE€1835Indian land cessions (dates of cession)1832Indian reservations0300Miles€INDIAN LAND CESSIONS AND MIGRATIONS . 1820 TO 18401ehad no force and Georgia citizens could notThe only Western statesman to denounce theenter without consent.treatment of the Cherokees was Henry Clay.Without legal support, but with the tacit ap-Although the Indians had no vote, and althoughproval of the White House, Georgia defied thehis constituents in Kentucky had no interest inCSupreme Court rulings and forced the evacua-the matter, Clay made a fervent speech in thetion of the Cherokee nation to Oklahoma. TheSenate in 1835. He accused Georgia of violatingCherokee removal began without notice in thethe most elementary principles of justice andmiddle of winter. Whites took the Indians' live-decency, and severely criticized Jackson. Butstock, farm tools, and household belongings. OnJackson refused to oppose Georgia. He was athe trek west, about one hundred CherokeesWesterner, forever unsympathetic to the Indians,died each day from cold, hunger, or disease.and convinced that their removal was desirable

380Conditions of Life in the Mid-nineteenth Century1831 and 1840 in Pennsylvania alone. Althoughexist. Lasting organizations for the protectionthe workers involved were threatened withof American workers did not develop until aftercriminal prosecution and the use of state troops,the Civil War, but during the boom years 1834they believed there was no other way to pressto 1837, trade union membership rose fromfor higher wages and improved working con-26,000 to 300,000. Most of these unions wereditions.nonpolitical organizations, but PhiladelphiaInstead of striking over poor working condi-unions organized into the American Workingtions, many factory workers and craftspeopleMen's Party in order to more effectively seek amoved west to look for new opportunities. Anten-hour day, an end to licensed monopolies,estimated one-third of the Midwestern farmersequal property taxes, and free education forof the antebellum period had earned the moneytheir children.for their land as craftspeople or laborers in theThe Panic of 1837 dealt a staggering blow toEast. Even though new workers moved in tothe trade union movement. Some craft unions,replace them, employers could not degrade laborsuch as the printers, managed to weather theto European standards as long as there was landworst years, but most of the crafts were unableavailable on the continent.to compete with the rising mass productionGuild-style craft unions existed very early intechniques. These crafts, together with theirthe nation's history. They were composed ofunions, gradually disappeared. By the 1840sindependent, skilled artisans who employedlabor organizations in other trades began tojourneymen and apprentices. By the beginningrevive along with the economy. By the mid-of the nineteenth century these artisans had1850s almost all skilled workers were organized.expanded their businesses and become "mer-In addition to increased wages, labor's greatestchant capitalists." As competition among themcry was for reducing the working day to tengrew, they were forced to cut their employees'hours. By 1855 seven states had passed lawswages. Their workers, in turn, formed the coun-ensuring laborers' a ten-hour working day.try's first unions when their income dwindledand their status was threatened by mass pro-IMMIGRANTS AS WORKERSduction.These early efforts to organize labor unionsThe European immigrants who flooded thewere opposed at first by both management andcountry before the Civil War could rightfullygovernment. Labor combinations were regardedclaim to have been exploited. One-half millionas illegal conspiracies to inspire revolt andof them entered the United States in the 1830s,violence. Their very existence was considered1.5 million in the 1840s, and over 2.5 million ina menace to both employers and nonunionthe 1850s. They came from northern and west-workers.ern Europe, especially Germany and Ireland,Labor was further discouraged from organiz-driven by unemployement, religious persecution,ing by the traditional emphasis on individualand famine in their native countries. Steamshipseffort to overcome obstacles, the use of childrenthat carried American cotton and lumber to Eu-for unskilled jobs, and the instability introducedrope converted unoccupied space on their returninto American society by the lure of the frontiertrips into rough passenger quarters. An immi-and by the influx of destitute immigrants.grant could travel in steerage on these cargoIn 1842 the Massachusetts Supreme Courtvessels from Liverpool to New York for underruled that labor unions were not illegal combi-$15. But the food was bad and quarters werenations unless they were planning a conspiracy.crowded, stuffy, and unsanitary. Outbreaks ofNow unions finally had some official sanction toepidemics were common. On one crossing of381Industrial Growththe steamship Lark, for example, 158 out offactories, built the nation's railroads, and dug440 steerage passengers died of typhus.her canals. Chinese immigrants provided an im-Germans and some Scandinavians pushedportant source of labor for the Western minesinto the Western regions of America. Theand railroads.poorer immigrants, however, had no money toBut despite their hopes, their hard work, andpurchase farmland. Most of them remained intheir contribution to American growth, the im-the Eastern seaports. They were usually desti-migrants were often exploited and unhappy. Liketute, often unskilled, and eager for work of anythe Americans they replaced, they had to facekind. They were swiftly absorbed into the fac-the new industrial work ethic and be bent totories of the Northeast.industrialized patterns. Their depressed wagesBecause the immigrants demanded less com-were hardly sufficient to live on. New arrivalsfort and stayed on over the years mill ownerswere easy prey for swindlers who overchargedgradually replaced their farm girls with Irishthem for food, lodging, and transportation. Be-immigrants. Desperation forced them to acceptcause they could afford only the cheapest hous-lower wages than the American workers and toing, most lived in dire poverty in the slums ofshun unionization so as not to displease theirthe larger Eastern cities. They were ideal pros-employers. By 1860 Irish immigrants accountedpects for greedy realtors who crowded theirfor over half of the labor force in the Newtenements with as many families as possible. AEngland mills.typical New York tenement housed as many asThe influx of immigrants was a major factor4000 people, most with nowhere else to go.in the rapid growth of the American economySanitary conditions in these buildings were de-in the antebellum period. Welsh and some En-plorable, life expectancy was low, and the mor-glish workers labored in the coal mines oftality rate high.Pennsylvania and in the lead mines of MissouriIn some cities Irish Roman Catholics facedand Wisconsin. German and English workersthe strong prejudices of American Protestants.increased the country's supply of skilled crafts-The newcomers were blamed for their ownpeople. Irish workers toiled in New England'spoverty and wretched living conditions, forurban crime, and for spreading disease. A lead-ing New York citizen blamed the 1832 choleraepidemic on immigrants, "the lower classes ofTOTAL POPULATION 1790-1850intemperate, dissolute and filthy people huddledtogether like swine in their polluted habitations."( M I L L I o N S )Though they were not as readily exploited as25the other immigrants, the Scandinavians, Ger-mans, Dutch, Czechs, and Finns who moved20into the interior of the country also found hard-ships. Their new life was considerably different15from the one they had left behind. They wereunfamiliar with the soil crops in America, and10American frontier life differed radically fromEuropean village life. American farmers lived5in houses that were widely separated fromtheir neighbors. The loneliness and isolation theCEuropeans experienced in their new country told1790180018101820183018401850heavily upon their families.

424Mid-nineteenth Century Expansion: Manifest DestinyFrom the beginning of the colonial period Amer-1. Acquired seven thousand miles of territoryicans had been constantly moving westward,on the border between Maine and Canada;even when forbidden to do so by the British2. Annexed the Republic of Texas;government. Both Thomas Jefferson and John3. Settled the Oregon boundary dispute withQuincy Adams believed the United States wouldEngland; andultimately control the whole North American4. Fought a war with Mexico which resultedcontinent. The Louisiana Purchase, the War ofin the acquisition of the territories of New1812, and the Adams-Onís Treaty of 1819 wereMexico and California.other manifestations of the country's expansion-ist tendencies. Even the Monroe Doctrine can beThis aggressive wave of expansion was dignifiedseen as an attempt to prevent European inter-by the term "manifest destiny.' The phrase wasference in what was considered an area designedcoined in the middle of the decade to describeto be controlled by the United States. For thirtythe widely held belief that the people of theyears after the Monroe Doctrine was announcedUnited States were destined to possess all ofin 1823, American foreign policy was concernedNorth America to the Pacific Ocean. The termalmost exclusively with the Western Hemi-first appeared in an article by John L. O'Sullivan,sphere. In particular, the United States waseditor of the Democratic Review in New York.vitally interested in acquiring all the land be-It is "our manifest destiny," wrote O'Sullivan intween the Louisiana Purchase and the PacificJuly 1845, "to overspread the continent allottedOcean.by Providence for our yearly multiplyingThe movement to push the country's bounda-millions." Because it gave to America's expan-ries to the Pacific reached its peak during thesion a sense of lofty inevitability, the phrase1840s. In a period of ten years, the United"manifest destiny" caught on quickly and be-States did the following.came part of the American vocabulary.Origins of the Expansionist MovementOne reason westward expansion was able toWestward expansion, though, was more thanbecome an American preoccupation was that ita race between North and South to gain politicalsatisfied such a diverse set of needs. It was vitalleverage. There was a sense in which the moodto Southerners since it created the possibility ofof manifest destiny was part of the spirit ofmore slave states. Already outnumbered in theadventure so characteristic of nineteenth-cen-House of Representatives, the South needed totury America. Many Americans went west outmaintain the balance between free and slaveof the same pioneering instinct which originallystates in order to protect what it considered itsdrove people to leave Europe and come to thevital interests. An equal number of slave andNew World. Henry David Thoreau spoke forfree states would mean equality in the Senate,his entire generation when he said, "I am leav-and no bill could become law without the ap-ing the city more and more and withdrawingproval of both houses of Congress. Similarly,into the wilderness I must walk towardthe Northern states wanted to add new territo-Oregon and not toward Europe."ries out of which to carve free states. By in-Much of this movement was touched off bycreasing free-state influence in the Congress,the phenomenal growth of the American popu-Southern opposition to the demands of Northernlation. Immigrants were moving into the olderbusiness interests could be overcome.regions of the country in great numbers between

425Origins of the Expansionist Movement1830 and 1860, and many small farmers andthe nineteenth century. Americans thought thatcotton planters sought the border lands of Texas,their system of government was superior to allCalifornia, and Oregon almost as much to getothers, and that they had the right, perhaps evenaway from the "crowded" areas as to fulfillathe responsibility, to spread their institutionsdesire for new lands. As Americans began toacross the continent. Most Americans felt thatsettle new parts of the continent, the promiseDivine Providence had ordained the country'sof new and increased commerce further rein-expansion to the Pacific Ocean. In their opti-forced the trend. The spread of cotton culturemism, many people actually believed that byaroused the avarice of planters, textile manu-taking lands away from England, Spain, Mexico,facturers, and merchants who dreamed of anand the Indians, they were providing a havenever-expanding market for cotton products. Infor the oppressed masses of Europe. As oneaddition to Thomas Hart Benton's dream oforator explained, "It is not good taste in indi-developing America's inland waterways, thereviduals to indulge in boasting; but a nation iswere also the superb natural harbors at Pugetallowed to assume an elevated tone." Such com-Sound, San Diego, and San Francisco to temptments reflected the self-confidence of Americansshippers. According to an American captain inwho maintained that by providing adequatethe 1820s, San Diego Bay was "as fine a bayspace for its own political and economic devel-for vessels under three hundred tons as ever wasopment, the United States would undermineformed by Nature in her most friendly mood totyranny all over the world.mariners." With such harbors as terminals fora planned transcontinental railroad, merchantsTHE MAINE BOUNDARY DISPUTEdreamed of the American Pacific Coast as thejumping-off place for extensive trade with theThe explosive decade of expansionism beganOrient.modestly in 1842 with a treaty settlement be-In addition to political and commercial mo-tween the United States and England over thetives and the pressures of population growth,Maine-Canada border. Known as the Webster-the fear of Europe was an important impetusAshburton treaty, it was intended only to adjustfor expansion. Americans believed that if Euro-contested areas, but it helped set the tone ofpean countries acquired a foothold on the conti-manifest destiny because it put the Americannent, they would threaten the American demo-flag in a part of the continent that another coun-cratic mission. In addition to competing withtry claimed. Five years before the treaty wasthe United States commercially, countries suchsigned, such an amicable agreement had notas England might even try to establish coloniesseemed likely. In addition to a strong sense ofon the West Coast of North America. Thesemutual mistrust between Britain and the Unitedmisgivings made Americans want to ensure theirStates, several incidents along the Canadian-safety by expanding the country's borders. ButAmerican border appeared to make open warin so doing, a vicious circle was created: thebetween the two countries a very distinct pos-European countries, fearing America's politicalsibility.and economic ambitions, tended to be moreIn 1837 a group of Americans had supportedinterested than ever in North America.a minor Canadian insurrection, hoping it wouldThe American ambition for expansion can belead to American annexation of Canada. Theseen in many ways. On the one hand, it repre-British were able to suppress the revolt easily,sented blatant aggression against the Indianbut Americans living near the border continuedtribes occupying the western parts of the conti-to help the rebels slip back into Canada onnent as well as against Mexico. But on the otherregular raiding parties. One night Canadian offi-hand, it was also part of the same nationalisticcials crossed the Niagara River, killed an Amer-spirit expressed by many Western countries inican, and set fire to an American boat, the503Forward, Volunteers!Factors in the War EffortTAKE THE BOUNTIESWHILE THE OPPORTUNITY LASTSIthan were needed immediately, most joined foronly twelve months.*By April 1862 the South, too, had to insti-tute a draft. Its First Conscription Act declaredthat all able-bodied white males between eigh-*ENLIST INteen and thirty-five years of age were liable to*three years of military service. Like the draft actDURYEA'Sin the North, however, the South's ConscriptionAct exempted certain professional and wealthyQUAVES *people which alienated many of the less priv-SECOND BATTALIONileged and aroused resistance to volunteering.19th WARD*The average young Southern male began toBROOKLYN.view the effort as "a rich man's war and a poorman's fight." Moreover, states' rights sentiment*was so strong among some state leaders that*BE*they refused to allow their troops to become**part of the Confederate Army.With resistance to volunteering and evasionCAPTAIN A. T. GROSER.of conscription on both sides, it was difficult atHEADQUARTERS,times to maintain military discipline. There areCORNER BEDFORD AVE AND CLYMER ST.no reliable figures as to exactly how many men- casserved on either side. Estimates suggest thatsome two million men probably wore the Union(Courtesy New York Historical Society, N.Y.C.)blue and less than half that number wore theConfederate gray. Terms of enlistment variedfrom two weeks to the duration of the war.exempted or were able to pay someone to serveIn a short war the North's numerical superi-in their place.ority would have meant relatively little, givenOn the other hand the North was consider-the South's original military superiority. As theably aided by heavy immigration during the warconflict ground on, the North built its armiesyears. Over eight hundred thousand newcom-to twice the size of those of the South. Its ad-ers arrived between 1861 and 1865, more thanvantage in numbers became an important psy-the total casualties of the North. So many im-chological, as well as physical weapon. Gradu-migrants joined up that the Union forces wereally the Confederate Army's strength waseventually one-fifth foreign-born in composi-sapped and its reinforcements almost ceased.tion. In one division commands were given inSouthern losses weakened the will to continuefour different languages.the conflict. Meanwhile the Northern armies,In the South Jefferson Davis at first called fordespite heavy casualties, seemed to grow moreone hundred thousand volunteers. The Con-powerful with every battle.federate Congress later authorized a volunteerarmy of four hundred thousand troops for threeCOMMANDERSyears. The number that enlisted, however, didnot reach this figure, even though the initialThe South had an initial advantage over theresponse was enthusiastic. Although the SouthNorth in the brilliance of its field commanders.had far more volunteers than the North, moreFor twenty years before the war a coterie of

oaSS2CSleilnaIbil"The Sowers" depicts Swedish immigrant farmers who settled in the American Mid-awest. (Index of American Design, National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.)tavidual buyers at the low cost of $2.50 an acre.ises of railroad agents, and still others fled Eu-But again few small farmers benefited. Largerope's poor wheat-growing years of the 1870s,corporations hired dummy buyers to file claimsMost settlers, however, were poor Americanand bought up most of the good land availablefarmers moving westward to find new opportu-under the act. As the commissioner of the Gen-nities.Ileral Land Office complained in 1901, "In manyA growing number of inventions enabledAinstances whole townships have been enteredfarmers to cope better with their hostile envi-under this law in the interest of one person orronment. Barbed wire had lowered the cost ofIfirm, to whom the lands have been conveyed asfencing, but the water shortage was a persistentIlsoon as receipts for the purchase price were is-problem. In the East a well might be only eighttsued." Such abuses allowed a few great lumberto thirty feet deep and water raised by hand,companies to gain control of the forests cover-but in the West wells had to be machine drilleding the Rocky and Sierra mountains at a lowthirty to three hundred feet deep and the wateraprice.raised by windmill. Windmills were introduced\to the West in the 1870s but were not cheapPLAINS FARMINGenough to be generally available until the 1890s,SDespite land-grabbing by corrupt speculatorsBy the turn of the century almost every farm onand the terrible hardships of farming on thethe Plains had its own windmill and deep-drilledIPlains, many parts of the West were quicklywell.populated from 1865 to 1890. Hordes of land-Even with the aid of windmills water was nothungry farmers from Scandinavia poured intoplentiful. Not until the federal governmentthe Northwest after 1865. Irish, Scottish, En-sponsored dam projects in the twentieth centuryglish, German, and Russian immigrants alsodid large-scale irrigation of the desert begin. Inmade up a significant proportion of the popula-the nineteenth century the federal governmenttion that settled the Great Plains in the 1870s.had handed the problem over to the states, butSome of these Europeans came to escape mili-the states were unable to tackle such ambitioustary duty, others were lured by the bright prom-projects. Before the irrigation dams were built,595The Railroad Erathe road. Driven on by a spirit of competition,rail arteries. The Western states eventually con-the Irish immigrants working for the Uniontributed almost fifty-five million acres but thePacific and the Chinese laborers imported by thefederal government gave even more. RailroadCentral Pacific engaged in a race to the meetingbuilders received millions of dollars in interest-point. On May 10, 1869, they joined the rails atfree cash loans from the federal treasury, and

Promontory Point, Utah. As Leland Stanford,approximately 135 million acres in land grants.one of the four directors of the Central Pacific,Companies who received the usual grants of tendrove a golden spike to symbolize the linkup,square miles, alternating in checkerboard pat-railroad workers and directors alike cheered andtern on either side of each mile of track, didwaved their hats in the most dramatic scene inmore than just build railroads across the freethe history of American railroading.land. They upped their profits by logging someOther transcontinental lines followed. Theof their forest land and selling off other acreage.directors of the Central Pacific established theSouthern Pacific, originating at San Franciscoand ending at New Orleans. The Atchison, To-RAILROAD TYCOONSpeka and Santa Fe was extended from Atchison,Such enticements lured the ambitious, and some-Kansas, to San Diego, California, and linked uptimes the unscrupulous, into positions of tre-with the Southern Pacific in New Mexico. Inmendous wealth and power as railroad magnates.1883 the Northern Pacific began carrying pas-The notorious speculator and swindler, Jaysengers and freight between the Twin Cities,Gould, went into railroading as he had gone intoMinneapolis-St. Paul, and Portland, Oregon.other enterprises (such as cornering the goldAnd in 1893 the Great Northern line crossedmarket in 1869). Gould recognized the opportu-the continent from Duluth, Minnesota to Seattle,nity of making lots of money, and he was will-Washington.ing to use any tactics, including cheating hisown line, the Erie Railroad, out of millions ofdollars.FINANCINGA small figure with a humble manner, GouldRailroad building consumed enormous amountsoften outwitted his competitors before they sus-of money. The long construction period broughtpected his motives. For example, he and hisno monetary return and, once completed, thepiratical partners, the slovenly Daniel Drew andlines were expensive to operate and maintain. Inthe flashy "Jubilee" Jim Fisk, prevented "Com-1890 America's railroads were worth more thanmodore" Vanderbilt from taking over their Erie$8 billion, owed more than $5 billion, and tookRailroad by manipulating the company's stock.in revenue exceeding $1 billion. To fund such aVanderbilt owned the New York Central Rail-monumental enterprise the railroad companiesroad, the largest line in the East, but Gould andsold shares in their business to private individu-his partners at first kept him from gaining aals and institutions such as banks. So manycontrolling interest in their line by printing moreforeign investors put money into United Statesstock than even the wealthy Vanderbilt couldtilloads that by 1907 over one-fourth of theirafford. When a bill to legitimize the printing ofentre value was held by Europeans, chiefly thethe watered stock came up before the New YorkIritish.State legislature, both Gould and one of Vander-Government policies also aided railroad devel-bilt's agents were on hand to buy votes, atopment. Built under state charter, the railroadssomething like $15,000 per legislator. One en-were offered money, land, and sometimes tax-terprising Albany official came out of the fightstatus by state and local governmentswith $75,000 in payments from Vanderbilt, andnexchange for connecting them with the major$100,000 from Gould, who won the vote.616The Social and Economic Response to IndustrialismIndustrialization did not happen in a vacuum.that separated them from their wealthy employ-New social and economic trends complementeders, began searching for ways to increase theirand interacted with the nation's growing indus-bargaining clout and standard of living. And thetrial reality. Europe's poor and persecuted begancountry's native-born population began movingarriving on American shores in ever greaterfrom the farm to the city. The new order cre-numbers after the Civil War. The country'sated fresh opportunities as well as fresh prob-working people, increasingly aware of the gulflems.The New ImmigrationThe number of immigrants entering the countrycluded many Catholics and Jews who frequentlybegan to increase after the Civil War. In theexperienced resistance to their presence on reli-1860s almost ninety percent of these newcom-gious grounds.ers arrived from Great Britain, Germany, Ire-land, and the Scandinavian countries. ManyINCENTIVES FOR IMMIGRATIONwere attracted by the cheap land available inthe West. The Germans and Scandinavians usu-The need to escape poverty and persecution wasPeally settled on farms in the Midwest and thethe most important factor behind the massnorthern Plains and in cities such as Milwau-movement out of Europe that began in the 1860s,kee, Chicago, and Cincinnati. The British andRepeated crop failures, low prices, and de-IlIrish tended to settle in the cities of the Easternpressed times led farmers and farm workers inseaboard. These people were generally easy toEngland, Ireland, the Scandinavian countries,assimilate since their backgrounds were not un-and Germany to come to America. Later, eco-like most Americans'. They were fair-skinnednomic changes in parts of Italy and in the Aus-EAnglo-Saxon or Teutonic types. Many weretro-Hungarian Empire created hardships forProtestants and literate. And most had lived un-peasants and farm workers in those areas. Italy-der a constitutional type of government.was plagued by poor soil, an absence of coal,By the early 1880s, however, the nationaland a scarcity of manufacturing; taxes werecharacter of immigration began to change. Thehigh, there was little opportunity for education,countries of northern and western Europe beganand few farmers owned the land they workedfa:industrializing, too, and a decreasing birth rateThe Slavic peoples of the Austro-Hungarianwacoupled with a rising demand for labor encour-Empire and Russia also faced poverty and illit-miaged many to stay where they were. At thetheeracy. In addition, many people left Russia andsame time, conditions in southern and easterneastern Europe to escape persecution for theirgrEurope created a new source of immigrants.religious or political beliefs. Russian Mennon-griNow people began pouring into the Unitedites were discriminated against and Russianca:States from Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia, andJews were submitted to a violent anti-SemitictriFinland, as well as from the Balkan states, Tur-campaign that began in the 1880s with pogromsavkey, Greece, and Portugal. These people wereand restrictive laws.shpoor and their desperate need for work broughtthiPowerful forces in America also encouragedthem into sharp competition with American la-wiimmigration. In the late nineteenth century theborers. Furthermore, this "new immigration" in-bucountry had an increasing need for labor in

617The New ImmigrationWASHDAXMONT.VMASS.MINNOREVAWISCR.I..IDAHO$ DAKMICHOCONN.vPENN:NJOHIODELNEBBIOWASIND.MDANEV.oDAas00W.VA.AUTAHoAVA.AO COLDoVaO>40&7oCALIFKANSMO.KY.N. CAR.OTENNOKLA. TERR.ARIZ TERR0ARKOS. CAR.N. MEX TERR.GA.ALA.0MISS.5TEXASLA.FLA.Percentage of foreign-born:Less than 10%Minorities:10% to 30%BritishGermanMore than 30%IrishItalianEUROPEAN IMMIGRATION PATTERNS-1910Russian and BalticScandinavianfarming, mining, and manufacturing. RailroadsWORKING AND HIRING PATTERNSwanted to sell their large landholdings, whichmeant encouraging people to settle the areasThe newcomers had to find jobs as soon as theythey serviced. These industries and the immi-arrived. Four-fifths were of working age andgration bureaus of the Western states createdtheir desperate financial condition forced themgreat advertising campaigns in Europe. Ameri-to take low-paying jobs offered by industriescan representatives toured the European coun-that needed cheap labor. Some were even hiredtries, touting the great economic opportunitiesin Europe by representatives of American com-ivailable in the United States. American steam-panies. In these cases they were given their pas-ship lines cooperated with the advertisers sosage over and then paid it back out of payrollhat they might fill their returning cargo shipsdeductions during the years they worked for thewith people. Travel in steerage was an ordeal,company-2 practice that was finally outlawedbut it was cheap.by the Foran Act of 1885.Hester Street on New York'sLower East Side was home tomany newly arrived immi-grants.tVetVpt.Some immigrant workers were recruited byperiod. Most lived in the central business dis-atheir compátriots in America. One example istricts of cities since that was where the jobsgthe Italian and the Greek padrone system. Pa-were. The only way they could hope to save aodrones were ethnic leaders who organized "im-little money was to live in run-down buildingsNmigrant banks," or groups of unskilled workers,dcalled tenements where the rent was cheap.in their homeland. They arranged transportationThese ghetto conditions also reinforced theirITtlover and provided jobs and housing for the re-cultural identity by providing friendships andCcruits when they arrived in America. The pa-familiar customs.drones were not in it for nothing, but profitedThus, although most immigrants had comenfrom the system by taking advantage of the im-from rural areas, in America they became cityTEmigrants' unfamiliarity with the American wagedwellers because that was where the economicC2scale. They made a profit on every "sale."opportunities existed. The Russians were an ex-arFew immigrants, however, achieved the powerception. Many of them settled in Nebraska, Kan-01b)to exploit each other. Most found that theirsas, and the Dakotas. But few recent arrivals haddignity and standard of living improved verythe capital to invest in farmland, which was nomlittle in the United States. Prejudice, exploita-idlonger cheap or plentiful. By the early twentiethchtion in employment, and harsh living conditionscentury the new workers had taken over mostwere the lot of almost all immigrants in thisof the jobs in the textile and steel mills, them

619The New Immigrationmines, oil refineries, and the manufacturingFear of foreign radicalism and subversion wasplants. They also provided most of the country'sa powerful force in creating prejudice. Many ofdomestic servants.the new immigrants had come from countrieswithout representative governments, leadingPREJUDICE AND NATIVISMsome Americans to believe that they were prob-The anti-foreign feeling, usually called nativism,ably radicals or subversives who wanted tothat had been prominent in the twenty yearsoverthrow a capitalist economy. Many employ-preceding the Civil War resurfaced in the 1880sers claimed that the immigrants were "anar-and 1890s. In the pre-Civil War years nativismchists and communists," reinforcing the hostilityhad had several causes. Americans of Englishalready felt by other Americans. Yet these sameProtestant ancestry had a deep-seated fear offactory owners exploited immigrant laborers andthe Roman Catholic Church which had figuredfrequently used them as strikebreakers.prominently in English politics in the sixteenthAmerican workers often greeted the new im-and seventeenth centuries. They believed thatmigrants with hostility, too. While AmericanCatholic theology ran counter to the individual-workers were fighting for higher wages, theistic spirit of American life. Many Americansnewcomers, unfamiliar with the country andhad also associated immigrants with radical at-desperate for work, were usually willing to worktacks on government authority, since some offor whatever wages they were offered. This putthe pre-Civil War immigrants had been involvedthem in the difficult and ironic position of beingin European revolutions.a counterforce to organized labor's efforts to im-The immigrants of the 1880s and 1890s pro-prove working people's standard of living. La-voked even greater fear and hostility than thebor union leaders also felt that immigrants wereearlier arrivals had. By the late 1880s nativistsdifficult to organize because they did not speakthought they were almost all "undesirable"-English. But even though they were at firstItalians, Slavs, Jews, and others. Prejudicecaught in the middle of the struggle betweenwas expressed in housing discrimination andindustrialists and workers, by the 1880s theypublic attitudes, especially in the cities wherewere increasingly joining forces with other work-the immigrants tended to concentrate. Many olders in labor unions that demanded better payand new charges were leveled against the immi-and improved working conditions.grants. Those who were Roman Catholics hadIn 1887 the American Protective Associationone strike against them for that fact alone.(APA) was formed. The APA's efforts were di-Many came under harsh fire for being illiterate,rected particularly against Catholic immigrantsdirty, and poor, for living together in slum com-and people from southern and eastern Europe,munities and preserving alien customs. The "lit-whom they accused of being clannish, unable totle Italys" and "little Polands" of New York andassimilate, and racially inferior. But both theChicago were cited as typical examples. TheRepublicans and the Democrats repudiated thenew immigrants had a higher birthrate than theassociation and leading politicians and the clergyrest of the country, which made some Ameri-defended the loyalty of American Catholics.uns fear that the nation's original ProtestantPlagued by internal dissension, the APA brokemd Anglo-Saxon stock would soon be outbred,up by 1896.sutvoted, and "mongrelized" by "inferior"By the 1890s the popular concept of SocialSood. Finally, nativists charged that the im-Darwinism was being used to rationalize preju-sigrants had brought with them such radicaldice by claiming to show that the economic and)deologies as socialism, communism, and anar-political success of the United States was the1chism, which would undermine American de-result of the superior mentality of people oftnocracy.Anglo-Saxon background. Nativists expressede620The Social and Economic Response to Industrialismthe fear that the ethnic strains introduced bywere also resented for their success in farming.the new immigrants would pollute the "supe-The Japanese had bought some of the richestrior" Nordic "races." Madison Grant, in hisfarmlands on the West Coast. In fact, althoughbook The Passing of the Great Race, maintainedthey owned less than two percent of the land inthat mixing the "races" would lead to a lowerthat area, Japanese farmers dominated the pro-type of civilization. This prejudice was also sup-duction of tomatoes, spinach, strawberries, cel-ported by certain social scientists. Henry Prattery, onions, and cantaloupes. They were alsoFairchild, in his publication The Melting Potdisliked for refusing to give up their JapaneseMistake, said:citizenship.A Japanese Exclusion League, the labor un-What such a country really needs to concernions, and the Hearst press took advantage of theitself about is the effects of race mixture.unrest and dislocation of the economy caused byIf we can imagine the mating of two personsthe 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire toof absolutely pure stock of different races,demand that Japanese laborers no longer be al-each of the offspring would receive half oflowed into the country and that Japanese chil-its determiners from the germ plasm of onedren be segregated in the schools. Presidentrace and the other half from the germ plasmTheodore Roosevelt, concerned because Japanof the other race. In other words, they wouldwas a rising world power, sidestepped the issuebe strictly halfbreeds.The plant or animalby working out the Gentlemen's Agreement inbreeder knows that the indiscriminate mixing1908 with the Japanese government. Accordingof a large number of varieties can be expectedto this agreement Japan would voluntarily re-to produce just one result-the mongrel.strict the immigration of her nationals to theSome social scientists and writers assertedUnited States. Despite these arrangements, how-that different "races" had different nationalever, Americans on the West Coast continued tocharacteristics, and that some of these charac-attack the Japanese, whom they considered to beteristics-and therefore nationalities-were un-unassimilable and an economic threat. By 1920desirable. Prejudiced people could now regardthey were legally prohibited from leasing or buy-their bias as evidence of clear, scientific think-ing land in California.ing. They agreed with Fairchild that the newThe rising tide of anti-immigrant feeling inarrivals belonged to "races in a more primitivethe United States prompted Congress to appointstage of evolution." They approved when he de-a commission to investigate demands for immi-clared, "The figure of the melting pot shouldgration restriction. The resulting Dillinghamreally be replaced by the figure of the villageCommission Report of 1907 read like a list ofpound."the popular complaints against the "new immi-One group of immigrants was particularlygration." The charges, now given official gov-victimized by racial prejudice. The Japanese,ernment sanction, were nonetheless based onwho began immigrating to the United States inpopular fallacies and a biased perspective. The1885, presented a difficult challenge. Althoughaccusation that the immigrants tended to con-there were only seventy-two thousand Japanesegregate in clans in the cities overlooked the fadliving in the United States in 1910, most werethat, except for the few who became farmers,concentrated in the Pacific Coast states. Ameri-they had no choice. Discrimination in jobs andcans in that area were determined to preventhousing made it impossible for them to moveany more Japanese from entering. Like the Chi-out of their city ghettos. The assertion thatnese, whose immigration had already beenmany were unskilled could also be said of thestopped, the Japanese were accused of workingearlier immigrants. Moreover, the charge thatfor lower wages than American laborers. Theythey were unassimilable has not been borne out

Immigration: The ProspectImmigration: The Reality"Praised by Jesus Christus,inform you"It is mainly the immigrant and the childrenthat I intend to emigrate to America where 1of the immigrant who swell the ranks of [the]have many friends, for the most part relatives,indigent element in our great cities. Those whowho write that I can come to them and they willare poverty stricken are not necessarilyfind work for me. I know only one handi-parasitic.If through continued poverty theycraft, carpenter's. I practiced with a countrybecome truly parasitic, then they pass over tocarpenter, but at the present time it is verythe ranks of the criminal, the pauper, thedifficult to find material, and therefore difficultvicious, the indolent and the vagrant, who, liketo earn.the industrial class, seek the cities.1 know how to read and I read many booksThe dangerous effects of city life on immi-and papers, Gios Ludu, Lud Bozy and othersgrants and their children cannot be too strongly[popular religious papers]. I also know some-emphasized. This country can absorb millionsthing about writing, as you can see from thisof all races from Europe and can raise them andletter. I have been to some monthly agriculturaltheir descendants to relatively high standards:courses in Lublin, where I learned a little aboutof American citizenship in so far as it can findthe science of agriculture and model farming.places for them on the farms.11:Thope if I live to try with all my strength toJohn R. Commons, 1904organize a model farm but now, because of lackI(of money and because my father has still a debt,its difficult to make practical improvements in-any way or to buy agricultural machines, whichthe very dear."Thomas and Zuanieki,The Polish Peasant in Europe and America,1918-1920by the facts. In the 1870s the Irish, Germans,Kearney and his Workingmen's party directed aand Scandinavians started becoming active incampaign against the Chinese, accusing them ofAmerican politics, challenging its dominance bybeing immoral and of working for lower wagesthose of Anglo-Saxon ancestry. Since then, Ital-than American workers. Their campaign re-ans, Poles, and Jews have all taken their placesulted in the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882,in America's political life.cutting off all Chinese immigration for ten years.The provisions were made permanent in 1902.In 1882 Congress also forbade the entrance ofEARLY RESTRICTIONSpeople they defined as "undesirables": "luna-Even though the United States had been built bytics, convicts, idiots, and those who might read-omigrants for immigrants, demands continuedily become public charges," categories that werein immigration restriction. The first restrictiveexpanded with later legislation. In a further ef-ligislation was passed in the 1880s. Dennisfort to discourage immigration, the 1882 law

622The Social and Economic Response to Industrialismlevied a head tax of fifty cents on every personlieved that it challenged the concept of Americaadmitted to the country. In 1891 the administra-as a land of opportunity and that the test wouldtion of immigration was moved from the statenot provide a true measure of a person's char-to the federal level.acter. But pressures in favor of the literacy testBut these measures did not satisfy the ex-intensified, and in 1917 Congress was able totreme exclusionists who demanded a literacy testpass a law, over President Wilson's veto, deny-that they hoped would exclude further immigra-ing admittance to aliens over sixteen who weretion from eastern and southern Europe. Con-unable to read in any language. This law wasgress obliged in 1897 with a measure stipulatingthe first major step toward large-scale immigra-that all immigrants take such a test. Presidenttion restriction.McKinley, however, vetoed the measure. He be-Labor ConditionsThe nation's industrial labor force grew as im-dren were widely used in textile mills, coalmigrants and farmworkers moved into the citiesmines, and meat-packing houses.and, as farms became larger and more mecha-As America's economy became increasinglynized, there was a surplus of farm labor to sup-industrial, the workers lost a great deal of self-ply the larger urban market. By the end of thesufficiency. However, they also began to realizenineteenth century only about one-third of thethat their place in city factories was probablycountry's workers remained on the farms. Therepermanent and so they began struggling to adwere also more women and children in the laborjust to the factory system and to figure out howforce than ever before. Women worked mainly into win a share of its financial rewards. As cor-factories and as clerical staff in business offices.porations grew larger and more mechanizedThe number of working children under the agehowever, their desire for increased wages,of fifteen increased rapidly between 1870 andshorter hours, and more humane working con-1900, when laws began to be passed limitingditions became more difficult to attain. WhileStheir participation in the industrial force. Chil-smaller businesses had fostered personal rela-btbCSDYoung girl working at n spinningmachine in a textile factory aroundM1909.bSLHOUSE OF CORRECTION181"The Tables Turned" showsDennis Kearney being heldcaptive in the House of Correc-tions by a group of Chinese.THE TABLES TURNEDyour JARE HIN l KEALNEY MUS) 602Feelings against Chinese work-ers spread to Denver, Colo-rado, in 1880.Vof damage in the area. The railroad strike con-tinued to spread until about two-thirds of thecountry's mileage was shut down. In citieswhere railroad workers lived frightened busi-ness people demanded that the state militias becalled out to patrol the streets. Some people as-sociated the strikes with political revolution. Atnumber of ministers railed against the strikersfrom their pulpits with the hearty approval oftheir congregations.rThe violence of the 1877 strikes was unprece-,dented in American history. Governors of theafficted states appealed to the federal govern-hment for assistance. President Hayes respondedby dispatching federal troops to restore order inthe troubled areas. Faced with the prospect offederal intervention, the strikes collapsed.Violent demonstrations took place within theranks of labor, as well. In 1877 Dennis Kearneywas elected president of the Workingmen'sparty in California, on a platform advocating ac-tive opposition to Chinese labor. He charged theChinese with taking jobs from American work-its because of their willingness to work foriwer wages. Violent demonstrations against theChinese erupted in San Francisco and, within adays, angry workers had destroyed morehan $10,000 worth of property.674Politics in the Gilded AgeUnited States Post Office, the party bossesder but not to move the trains. The strikes werefinally exploded. At their urging, the Senateeventually broken, but Hayes's personal conflicttemporarily violated tradition and refused towas reflected in his diary: "The strikes haveconfirm the president's cabinet nominations.been put down by force, but now for the realWithin a few days, however, public outrage atremedy. Can't something by done by educationthis obvious political maneuver forced the Sen-of the strikers, by judicious control of the capi-ate to back down and confirm the nominations.talists, by wise general policy to end or dimin-Hayes continued to push for reform despiteish the evil? The railroad strikers, as a rule areopposition within the party, and finally foundgood men sober intelligent and industrious."himself in a showdown with Conkling. At issueHayes was now faced with a dilemma on thewas the New York Customs House, a long-issue of Chinese immigration. An 1868 treatystanding bastion of corruption controlled bywith China had included a provision for unlim-Conkling. Fully two-thirds of the nation's cus-ited immigration of Chinese laborers to thetoms revenues passed through the CustomsUnited States. Employers welcomed the provi-House and its officials were used to embezzlingsion but American workers feared competitionsizable amounts of these funds. Hayes, deter-for their jobs. As the depression grew worsemined to eliminate this source of graft, ulti-and jobs became more scarce, sentiment againstmately called for the resignation of two Cus-Chinese immigration grew. In 1879 Congress1toms House officials, Conkling appointeespassed a bill restricting immigration, but Hayes1Alonzo Cornell and Chester A. Arthur. Conk-vetoed it because he suspected it of being "in-Iling fought the dismissals in the Senate, butconsistent with our treaty obligations." Hayes'sIHayes revealed records documenting the cor-highly principled solution was to negotiate a)ruption and won his case.new treaty with China, one that permitted theDespite the revelations of the Customs HouseUnited States to restrict immigration. Although

Vscandal, however, there was very little supporthis solution accomplished the same purposeIfor curbing the spoils system. When Hayes leftwithout breaking the treaty, his popularity hadHthe White House in 1881, patronage abuses hadbeen damaged by the veto.not been eliminated.STHE ELECTION OF 1880VoHayes and LaborWith Hayes declining to seek a second term, the(The depression that began in 1873 grew worseRepublican presidential nomination was the ob-Cas the decade wore on, particularly in the cities.ject of a bitter struggle between the two fac-PIn 1877 the New York Times predicted that onetions of the party. The Stalwarts, led by RoscoeFthousand infants would die every week in theConkling, opposed any reform of the patronageTcity during the summer months. Large numberssystem and even wanted to run Grant again. TheVof workers were unemployed and unions hadHalfbreeds, undeservedly considered the moder-Rlittle power to help them since employers couldate reformers of the party, were, in fact, onlyaeasily replace troublesome workers with moreslightly less conservative than the Stalwarts. Thecooperative ones.battle between the two factions was more overilHayes genuinely sympathized with the de-power than policy. A deadlock at the Republicangpression hardships of the workers, yet his con-convention finally resulted in the nomination ofeservative philosophy placed him squarely oncompromise candidate James A. Garfield. Atotheir employers' side. When the railroad work-burly politician from Ohio, Garfield was anuers went on strike in 1877 to protest wage cuts,orphan who had worked his way up to becomenHayes dispatched federal troops to maintain or-a major general in the army and had served afa697The Late Nineteenth Centuryclaring itself neutral, had aided the Confederacy,neutrality might be vital to British security inif only indirectly. At the same time the French,the event of conflict with other European pow-contrary to the Monroe Doctrine, had tried toers. And she wanted to ensure that if she wentset up a monarchy in Mexico. These actionsto war with another power, a neutral Unitedfurther convinced Americans that the WesternStates would not sell ships to her enemy as sheHemisphere should quarantine itself to avoidhad sold them to the South during the Civilinfection from European politics.War.As a result, in 1869 Great Britain agreed tosubmit to arbitration her disputes with theCONFLICTS WITH GREAT BRITAINUnited States that had grown out of the CivilUntil the end of the century hatred of GreatWar. The Senate rejected the first agreementBritain was a popular rallying cry for politiciansbecause it made no reference to America's de-and the American press. An Englishman sta-mand that Britain admit her guilt in prolongingtioned in Washington once remarked that itthe war by supplying the Confederacy with seawould be "a comfort to go to a country whereraiders. Such an admission would have meantone can read the news without finding in everyhuge payments to the United States for indirectpaper an article accusing one's country of everywar damages. Before the agreement had beenconceivable crime." Silverites, for example,worked out, Senator Charles Sumner, chairmanoften accused supporters of the gold standardof the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, hadand big industrialists of having suspicious tiesmade a violent anti-British speech. He calcu-with England, the center of support for thelated that British interference had prolonged thegold standard and the world's leading bankingwar by two years and that Britain thereforepower.owed the United States more than $2 billion.The diversity of ethnic backgrounds inThis absurd claim had some popular appeal atAmerica undoubtedly helped perpetuate anti-home.British sentiment. For example, Populist dislikeNevertheless, two years after Sumner'sof the English may have come from the Ger-speech, on May 8, 1871, the two countriesman, Scandinavian, and Dutch ancestry ofsigned the Treaty of Washington and the Sen-many farmers. The Irish, a large and crucialate ratified it sixteen days later. The treaty wasvoting bloc, were particularly anti-British. Thethe result of the patient and astute diplomacyFenians, a group of lrish-Americans who sup-of Grant's secretary of state, Hamilton Fish.ported Irish independence from Great Britain,In it, Britain apologized for the destructioneven carried out small raids on Canada in 1866wrought by the British-built Alabama and anand 1871. The band hoped to conquer Canadaarbitration tribunal was established to considerand hold it hostage until Ireland was liberatedthe United States' demand for war damages.from oppressive British rule. At the very leastThe arbitration tribunal awarded the Unitedthey hoped the raids would provoke a British-States more than $15 million for Civil WarAmerican conflict and thus help the Irish in-losses as well as the disputed San Juan Islandsdirectly. But anti-British feeling was strongsouth of British Columbia. In addition, theenough to prevent the American governmentUnited States was required to pay Great Britainfrom stopping the raids. And in the end thealmost $2 million for attacks on British shipstaids merely intensified bad feeling betweenduring the Civil War and more than $5 millionCanada and the United States.for fishing rights in the Canadian fisheries. BothIronically, the British were becoming friend-nations also agreed that neutral countries wouldGer toward the United States. By the late 1860snot build or arm vessels for any country if thereBritain was becoming aware that Americanwas reasonable grounds to believe that they

802The 1920swhich lasted six years and attracted interna-the policies which had led the nation into a fu-VCtional attention. Despite the continued ferventtile war. The resulting overturn of the Demo-afpleas of their supporters, who said that theycrats announced a decade in which an isolation-Whad not received a fair trial, Sacco and Van-ist government would be dedicated primarily tolazetti were electrocuted in 1927. For a wholeprotecting the interests of business.ougeneration of American liberals their imprison-When the Republicans convened in Chicago,poment and death brought into question the jus-the contestants for the nomination were Gen-getice of the nation's courts.eral Leonard Wood, an independent personalityanNativism also manifested itself again in thewho favored nationalism and antiradicalism,mefurther restriction of immigration. Prior to theGovernor Frank O. Lowden of Illinois, an ex-tw1920s the only limitations on entrance toperienced executive with special appeal to farm-ticthe country were the exclusion of Orientals, theers and businesspeople in the Midwest, andcoinsane, convicts and, in 1917, of persons overHiram Johnson of California, a former progres-masixteen who were not literate in any language.sive and isolationist. However, the professionalsofAfter the war, however, labor leaders protestedof the party and their business allies, feelingprthat they would lose recent wage gains if un-assured of victory in November, wanted a can-Lelimited immigration continued. They weredidate they could manage easily. In the middlepe:joined by others who continued to argue thatof the night, in the now-famous "smoke-filledthe nation was being flooded with immigrantsroom," they made their choice. On the tenthfrom southern and eastern Europe. Betweenballot the convention named Senator Warren1905 and 1914 immigrants had arrived at theG. Harding of Ohio. Calvin Coolidge was hisTrate of one million each year and more than ninerunning mate.hundred thousand arrived in 1920. The nativ-Harding was a remarkably handsome man ofTHists' arguments and the new influx of immi-no more than average intelligence. Beneath hisgrants led Congress to pass the Emergencydistinguished appearance was a small-town pol-HaQuota Act in February 1921. It limited theitician with an undisciplined taste for women,errnumber of immigrants in any year to three per-liquor, and cards. But he did have a loyal anderrcent of the foreign-born of each national groupstubborn faith in the Republican party and hisalthat had been living in the United States invoting record was basically conservative. Hepo1910. The National Origins Act of 1924 washad taken no definitive position on any im-a 1still more restrictive. It set a quota of two per-portant issue and he could be counted on to letprocent, based on the number of immigrants fromcongressional Republicans regain control of na-coteach country who were residents in 1890. Sincetional politics. In his genial manner he epito-cab1890 predated the great wave of southern andmized the small-town America of his day.abieastern European immigration, the 1924 lawFolksy, unpretentious, and easygoing, he cor-surclearly meant relatively high admissions ofresponded with many Americans' idea of ano)Scandinavians, Germans, Irish and British. And"regular fellow."Husince only white inhabitants were counted, Af-Harding followed the advice of his managers,starica and Asia had no quotas at all.making few speeches and taking few stands onculcurrent issues. He promised lower taxes, highetMiTHE ELECTION OF 1920tariffs, immigration restriction, and assistanceret.to farmers. He condemned the League of Na-theThe election of 1920 came in the aftermath oftions but called vaguely for an internationalga\demobilization and disillusionment with Ameri-agreement to preserve the peace.macan participation in the war. The prevalent feel-The Democratic party, by contrast, was insoning was one of revulsion against the party andconfusion. Attorney General Palmer, highly fa-per

Japanese-American womenat a relocation center.Racial tensionsrine Corps began recruiting black volunteers. Itbecame noticeable that segregation of blacks inOld racial prejudices were heightened as the warthe army adversely affected their morale. Wheneffort increased the rate of social change andasked in a survey "Do you think that most Ne-created new demands for equal opportunity andgroes are being given a fair chance to do asrecognition of individual worth.much as they want to do to help win the war?"The acceleration of industrial output radi-fifty-four percent answered, "No." In 1945 thecally changed the lives of many black people,army experimented with mixed units and a fewdrawing more of them out of rural areas in theyears later all branches were completely deseg-South and into industrial cities like Chicago,regated. Despite these gains, social segregationDetroit, and Los Angeles. The growing presencecontinued in many forms during the war. Sep-of black people in industry, like the increase ofarate black and white blood banks, for instance,women, was largely the result of emergencycontinued to exist, even though it was a blackneeds, rather than the loosening of prejudices.physician, Dr. Charles Drew, who invented theWhile the Fair Employment Practices Commis-process of storing blood plasma.sion created in 1941 made some progressGerman-American Nazi sympathizers andagainst segregation and discrimination in de-Japanese-Americans were the only other majorfense plants, black demands also led to racialgroups whose civil liberties were curtailed dur-tensions. In June 1943 severe race riots strucking the war. Seventeen hundred Nazi sympa-Detroit. Twenty-five blacks and nine whitesthizers were rounded up by the FBI, and a fewwere killed. According to a Fisk Universityof their leaders were tried. In its dealings withstudy, there were 242 racial outbreaks in 47Japanese-Americans, however, the federal gov-cities in 1943 alone.ernment abandoned even democratic rhetoric.Segregation in the armed forces persisted de-Many Americans, especially on the West Coast,spite black leaders' requests for integratedwere very fearful of a Japanese invasion, whichunits. But some progress was made in integrat-they thought would be aided by a Japanese fifthing some areas of the service. Blacks in thecolumn within the United States. Areas with aarmed forces were at last sent to integrated of-high concentration of Japanese were put underlicers' training camps. Also, the navy changedcurfew, and more than one hundred thousandispolicy of using blacks only as messmen andJapanese-Americans were rounded up andalowed them to become sailors, assigning themcrowded into relocation centers hundreds ofships on a nonsegregated basis. And the Ma-miles away from their homes on the West882From Isolation to InterventionCoast. Although these actions were an obvioushausted, there was no opposition to his renomi-departure from peacetime standards of civil lib-nation in 1944. The fateful decision of theerties, the Supreme Court upheld both the cur-Democratic convention was to replace Henryfew and relocation policies as justifiable meansWallace with Senator Harry S Truman of Mis-of preventing such activities as spying and sab-souri as Roosevelt's running mate. The Repub-otage during wartime. Ironically, many Japa-licans nominated the young and efficient gover-nese-Americans served in the armed forces,nor of New York, Thomas E. Dewey, as afighting against the Axis powers in Europe.contrast to the fading president. Nevertheless,Roosevelt won a fourth term with 25.6 millionTHE ELECTION OF 1944to 22 million popular votes, and by 432 to 99Even global war did not interrupt the Americanelectoral votes.political process. Though Roosevelt was ex-War against the AxisWhile America mobilized for war Japan tried toNORTH AFRICAtake over the South Pacific. But Japan's advanceAllied plans for a counteroffensive against theinto Asia did not alter the Allied resolve to con-Axis were finally worked out in the last monthscentrate at first on fighting Hitler in Europe.of 1942. Stalin had asked for an immediate in-During the first months of 1942, while tryingvasion of Europe from the north in order toto reach agreement on an overall strategy fordivert Hitler and save Russian lives. But Amer-the invasion of Europe, the Allies were limitedican forces were not ready for such an attack,to specific offensive and defensive actions.though Roosevelt gave it considerable thought.The German submarine force, which wasChurchill insisted that Germany's defense ofwreaking havoc on Anglo-American convoys inthe European continent was for the moment un-the Atlantic and disrupting trade in the West-breakable, and that a too-early invasion thereern Hemisphere, had to be stopped. Patrolswould be disastrous for the Allied forces. Stalinwere set up and scanning devices improved, butwas deeply angered when the Allies decided toair attacks were found to be of little use againstattack in North Africa instead. The area fromthe underwater craft. By the end of 1943 theLibya to Egypt had been taken by German Fieldsubmarine menace had been substantially re-Marshal Erwin Rommel in an Axis attempt toduced, but it still continued to do great harm.seal off the Suez Canal, a vital Allied supplyMeanwhile the British Royal Air Force, as-route. The Allies agreed on a plan to invadesisted by the United States Air Force, beganNorth Africa, destroy Rommel's forces, and usesaturation bombing raids on mass targets inthe area as a base for a northward assault onGermany. In Hamburg, for instance, sixty thou-Italy.sand civilians were killed during a single weekThe counteroffensive got off to a slow start.of Allied bombing in July 1943. Theoretically,For months British and German forces werethe objective of these raids was to cripple Ger-stalled in a confrontation around El Alamein,man industries by bringing cities such as Co-Egypt. In late October, however, the Germanslogne to their knees. At least as important,were finally routed. As they began a westwardhowever, were Allied desires to demoralize theretreat, British forces recaptured areas along theGerman population and to seek revenge for theMediterranean coast, reaching Tripoli by Janu-blitz on Britain.ary 1943.

975Johnson's Presidencypublic housing and other urban renewal proj-NAME b THE GREATects. But despite its promise, urban renewaloften created more problems than it solved.Neighborhoods which had provided a vital senseof stability for many minority groups werebroken up to make way for new projects, andinsufficient effort was made to relocate manyCONGRESSADof the victims of urban reconstruction. In Chi-cago, for example, newly constructed apartmentLABbuildings were frequently not used for the peo-ple, mainly blacks, who had been dislocated.Other significant legislation of 1965 and1966 included the creation of a new cabinetpost, the Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment, whose first secretary was RobertC. Weaver. In the area of immigration policy,the national quota system was terminated, anda system of hemispheric quotas was substituted.The new procedures ended the favored positionof northern Europeans in United States immi-gration rules. The first laws for environmentalcontrol were also passed, though their effectwas very slight. Among these measures were aA cartoonist's view of President Johnson's Greatwater pollution control law, a highway beauti-Society legislation.fication program, and a token effort to reducemotor vehicle exhaust fumes. Finally, the Na-tional Foundation on the Arts and Humanitieswas formed to stimulate and finance creativeresult. Moreover, the president and the countryendeavors in the arts.were increasingly preoccupied with the miasmaBy 1966 the momentum of Johnson's domes-of the Vietnam War. Among its important do-tic program had slowed almost to a halt. Greatmestic effects was the extent to which it showedSociety projects were costly, and much of thethe disaffection from American life of largeavailable funds were being steadily diverted tonumbers of American youth.finance American military involvement abroad.Furthermore, many people had reservationsFOREIGN POLICYabout the massive bureaucratic expansionneeded to administer the far-flung efforts. How-Although Southeast Asia was the dominantever, perhaps the greatest problem with thearea of concern during the Johnson administra-Great Society was that in the broadest sense ittion, there was significant activity in severalsimply did not seem to be working. Benefitsother parts of the world. In Latin America, thewere achieved in some specific areas, but on thepopularity which Kennedy had enjoyed did notwhole America's domestic problems werecontinue under his successor. Two crises, onedearly increasing. The Great Society programsminor and one major, created problems in thehad failed to deal satisfactorily with many ofCaribbean and ill will in Latin America. De-the problems faced by blacks in America, andmands arose in Panama for a new settlement onrepeated outbreaks of urban violence were thethe management of the Canal Zone and of the

1019Dissenting Voicesagreed to find peaceful means of settling dis-alized world. The cost of petroleum and allputed natural boundaries, arbitrate disputes, andpetroleum-related products skyrocketed. Due toto promote human rights, international cooper-the high cost of fuel, shortages of other criticalation, and a freer exchange of peoples and ideas.materials, such as metals, food, and timberThe two nations had also just engaged in aproducts, were also encountered. Throughoutsuccessful space docking mission (Apollo-1974 the economy again experienced the effectsSoyuz).of uncontrollable inflation. Prices exploded up-ward at an annual rate of over twelve percent.President Ford thus spent a great deal of hisTHE ECONOMYfirst year in office trying to solve the nation'sOne of the reasons that communist victories ineconomic and energy problems. He was particu-Southeast Asia were accomplished with so littlelarly concerned about inflation and, in Octoberresistance from the United States was that most1974, asked Congress to place a five percentAmericans were preoccupied with domesticsurcharge on income taxes and to cut govern-problems, particularly the state of the economy.ment spending. But with consumer buyingMore than anything else, the nation's concerndown, production also fell and unemploymentwith the continuing problems of inflation andwent from 5.3 percent in August 1974 to 9.2unemployment would affect President Ford'spercent in May 1975. Still more worried aboutstanding with the American public.inflation than about recession, Ford asked forAn economic upswing in late 1972 had pro-only a small tax reduction in January 1975, andvided temporary relief from the problems thein an effort to cut energy consumption, he in-Nixon administration had faced since the latecreased oil import prices and asked Congress1960s. But the nation soon learned that eco-to lift controls from domestic oil prices. But anomic growth and productivity could create asheavily Democratic Congress passed a largermany problems as they solved. With factoriescut than the president wanted and refused tothroughout the world operating at peak capacitysupport his energy program on the grounds thatonce again, the demand for raw materials swiftlyit would increase the price of petroleum prod-overtook the available supply. In addition, theseucts. In turn, Ford vetoed a number of billsproblems were compounded in late 1973 by awhich were designed to combat the recessionstaggering increase in the price of raw petro-through increased government spending. By theleum charged by the oil-producing nations ofmiddle of 1975 Congress and the president werethe world. The immediate effect was devastatingdeadlocked over how to solve the country'sin the United States and the rest of the industri-economic and energy problems.Dissenting VoicesWhile many Americans demanded an end to thetion developed by these two germinal move-criticism of American life, protests by certainments were borrowed, elaborated upon, andgroups increased. The tremendous outburst ofexpanded by new groups.protest which characterized the 1960s influencedSpanish-speaking Americans are the nation'sthe rise of new social movements in the 1970s.second largest minority group and by the 1970sProtest was no longer the exclusive domain ofthey began demanding an end to economic andintiwar activists and black civil rights leaders.cultural discrimination. Puerto Ricans and Chi-The techniques of organization and demonstra-canos (Mexican-Americans) began organizing1020The 1970s: Years of Trialin the 1960s to establish a sense of culturaltional audience. After occupying the Bureau ofidentity. They sought bilingual education in theIndian Affairs building there to attract attention,schools and Chicanos called for classes in theirthe movement took a violent turn with the oc-Mexican heritage. In an effort to improve theircupation of Wounded Knee Village in Southeconomic conditions Cesar Chavez organizedDakota, the site of an 1890 army massacre ofthe National Farm Workers Association in 1962.almost three hundred Dakota Sioux. The occu-A series of strikes helped raise the wages ofpation lasted from March to May 1973, andCalifornia's Chicano agricultural workers. Inwhen it ended the causes of unrest were far1975 the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was ex-from settled. The roots of the struggle lay intended to provide bilingual voting proceduresthe rivalries between Indian groups and thein states that had large non-English speakingeffort of a long oppressed people to bring itspopulations.plight before the whole country.Since their confinement on nonproductiveAnother explosive movement of the 1970sland, native Americans have been among thewas the struggle for women's rights. Althoughmost poverty stricken group in the Unitedthey accounted for over one-half the nation'sStates. Their dismal state during the depressionpopulation, many women had come to regardof the 1930s brought about a reversal of thethemselves as an oppressed group. In its moderngovernment's policy of breaking up the reser-form, the movement began in 1963 when Bettyvations. In 1934 the Indian Reorganization ActFriedan wrote The Feminine Mystique. In it, sheprovided for the survival of the Indian tribe asclaimed that American women had been victim-the basis for developing a sense of communityized by a set of ideas which define a woman'sand self-government. While many native Amer-happiness as total involvement in the roles oficans did not return to tribal life, later effortswife and mother. Even though increasing num-to terminate this policy were not successful. Inbers of women were entering the labor force,1970 President Nixon asked Congress to con-the old idea that a woman's place was in thetinue aid to the native Americans while at thehome still persisted. In an effort to gain equalsame time complying with their demand totreatment, women activists picketed meetings ofsupervise the administration of the aid them-professional associations and demonstratedselves. He specifically called for "self-determi-against many large corporations, demandingnation without termination" and opposed forcedequal pay for equal work. They forced their waydissolution of tribal organizations. Forty-eightinto male bars and stormed many other tradi-thousand acres of New Mexican land takentionally male bastions, challenging the notionwithout compensation was returned to the Taosthat women could be considered second-classPueblos.citizens.In the late 1960s, however, a large numberMiddle-class women formed the Nationalof young native Americans, many of whom hadOrganization for Women (NOW) in 1966. Theyserved in Vietnam, returned to their reservationsstrongly supported adding an equal rightsand began to organize the American Indianamendment to the Constitution as a legal pro-Movement (AIM). No longer satisfied withtection. Passed by both Houses of Congress bymerely controlling their own reservations, they1972, by mid-1975 it needed ratification by fourcalled for a return of all ancestral lands, com-more states to become the Twenty-seventhmunal living, and a reassertion of native Amer-Amendment to the Constitution. In 1972 aican culture. After a series of local demonstra-group wanting to encourage the participation oftions aimed at dramatizing their grievances,women in politics formed the National Women'sAIM called for a march on Washington in 1972Political Caucus.in order to bring their situation before a na-It was true that most women had always



