In England, many laborers were out of work. The owners of big estates had found the growing of wool so profitable that they turned their fames into pastures. It took very little labor to care for large flocks of sheep. The men who had plowed and harvested the old fields were then left without jobs. Many had no money with which to pay their way to the New World; but in order to go, they willingly sold their labor for a term of years in exchange for free passage. Men who were bound to a master in this way were called bond servants or indentured servants. There was also another class of servants sent out from England. European laws in those days were so severe that men were put in prison for very small offenses. People were even kept in jail for being in debt. Landing of the Pilgrims. After sixty-five days on the wintry Atlantic, the Pilgrims were very grateful to set foot on shore. They were the first colonists who came lo America for the right to worship as they chose, and the first to form a democratic government. Since English officials complained that the prisons were full, the government sometimes sent to the New World as bond servants many who had been convicted of petty crimes. After they had served some master the required length of time, these men were permitted to start anew. Many Seek Religious or Political Freedom. Some men brought their families to face hardship in America because they wanted free government. England at that time was the only large country of Europe in which the people had a share in the government. For many years Englishmen had elected to Parliament representatives who made laws and laid taxes. Then, in 1603, James T of Scotland became King of England. He refused to recognize the rights his English subjects had so long enjoyed. As a result, many Englishmen came to America to try their own ideas of government. To them, America was the "Land of the Free." Other settlers came because they wished to worship God in their own wav. In the sixteenth century, all Englishmen were supposed to belong to the Church of England. But not all Englishmen agreed about religion. They divided into many new sects, such as Puritans (who wished to "purify" the church worship), Quakers, Baptists, and Presbyterians. Neither these new sects nor the old Roman Catholics were allowed their own way of worship in England, so many of their followers came to America. Since most of the English colonies were among the few places in the world in the seventeenth century where a man could choose his own form of worship, men from France and from Germany also came to these colonies to have a chance at their own form of religion. For all these reasons, men soon became enthusiastic about founding colonies. Some young men from wealthy families became colonists themselves. Such men went chiefly for love of adventure. In 1631 Captain John Smith, a leader in the Virginia colony, wrote what he thought were the best reasons for tempting men to the colonies. They are given here, with the spelling modernized: "And truly, to a generous spirit, there is no pleasure comparable to good employment in noble actions . . . to see daily new countries, people, fashions, governments, stratagems; to relieve the oppressed, comfort his friends, subdue enemies, and adventure upon any danger for God and his Country'." As we shall see, most of the early English colonists were poor men. Someone else had to pay the cost of sending these settlers to the New World. In France and Spain the government paid the costs of the colonists. The English government, however, had little money for such projects, Rich merchants and great lords took over the task of paving for new colonies. Why should these men risk their money' in the New World? Some were patriotic. They saw Spain's Unit 2 War of Tripoli. One of the first conflicts to involve our Navy after its official creation during the time of trouble with France in 1798 was the war against the Barbary Pirates. When the Pasha of Tripoli demanded more tribute and attacked our shipping, President Jefferson dispatched a fleet to the Mediterranean. There victories by Stephen Decatur forced the pirates to give up their demands. Brown Broth"n When Americans heard the report, they were furious. Congress began preparations for war. Washington was appointed Commander-in-Chief of the army. A Navy Department was created, and frigates (warships) were built. During the next few months, the French captured many American merchant vessels. American frigates, in turn, captured several French privateers and some French frigates which were found sailing alone on the high seas. This naval war, however, did not last long, for a young general called Napoleon Bonaparte overthrew the French government and made himself master in France. Bonaparte who had great plans for all Europe did not wish to keep up a petty war with the United States. Many Americans were so angry with France that they would have preferred to go on fighting, but Adams wisely took the first chance to make an honorable peace. The Alien and Sedition Acts. The worst result of this short war with France was bad feeling at home — a common result of war. The Federalists thought the Republicans dangerous because they bad sympathized with the French Revolution. The Federalists got through Congress some law's known as the Alien and Sedition Acts. The Alien laws gave the President power to imprison or deport (send out of the country) any aliens (foreigners) whom he considered dangerous. The Sedition law' said newspapers or speakers who criticized the government or its officials were to be considered guilty of sedition (treason). The Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions. Some Republican editors were imprisoned and fined for criticizing Adams. Then the legislatures of Virginia and Kentucky passed resolutions declaring that these laws w'ere contrary to the Constitution. They pointed out that the Constitution. In establishing the right of judicial review in the Morbury versus Madison case, Chief Justice Marshall established the power of the Court in our constitutional system of checks and balances. Although the laws were unpopular, the legislatures of other States did not join Virginia and Kentucky (the states in which the Democratic- Republican party was strongest). People began to see that if a State could say laws passed by Congress were not constitutional, there soon would be no central government. However, there was a way to remedy things without destroying the government. An election was coming; the people could elect new men to carry out their wishes. The Federalists, who had passed the unpopular laws, were defeated in the election of 1800. Jefferson, leader of the Democratic-Republicans, was chosen as our third President, John Marshall. Before leaving the capital, John Adams made an important appointment. He made John Marshall Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Marshall remained Chief Justice for thirty-five years. During that time he had many important cases to decide. Sometimes the judges of the Supreme Court have to decide whether a law is "constitutional." In such cases, Marshall often argued that the "necessary and proper" clause of the Constitution gave Congress power to do many things that were not stated in so many words. Although he had been too young to be a member of the Constitutional Convention, Marshall's decisions on constitutional issues gave him the right to be called one of the makers of the Constitution. 186 Unit 4 who needed them. Parks and playgrounds gave both children and grown-ups a chance to have healthful outdoor recreation. Better schools were built. Ever)' city of any size had its art gallery, museum, and theaters. Many times mistakes were made in the attempts to settle the problems of the new cities. Often the The "Melting Pot." We Americans, even the Indians, are descended from immigrants or are immigrants ourselves. From all over the world our forefathers have poured into the United States, thus making this country the world's greatest "melt- ing pot. ' The United States was like a huge magnet, pulling hundreds of thousands of people to its unplowed land and bustling cities. Early in American history, most immigrants came from a few countries in Northern Europe. We have already read about English, Dutch, and German immigrants in colonial days. During the early years of the nineteenth century, the numbers increased steadily. Because of bad conditions at home, Irish and German immigrants made up a large share of the total number during those years. The Potato Famine. In Ireland the people hated English rule. They wanted home rule — a government of their own. They wanted to own their little farms instead of paving rent to English landlords who demanded more money whenever a farmer improved his house or his 376 Unit 7 money voted for improvements was wasted by dishonest or incompetent officials. The citizens did not always keep themselves informed on how the city was being run. There was much to learn, but more and more Americans came to see that their towns and cities must be well governed if they were to have healthful and happy homes. land. Besides, English laws kept them from doing much manufacturing. Wheat did not grow well in Ireland, and the people did not try to raise much but potatoes. Then in 1846-1847 the potato crop failed. Since England had a tariff on wheat which made the price of bread too high for poor people to pay, there followed a' dreadful famine. Hundreds of thousands of the Irish people died of hunger before England repealed the tariff on grain. All who could do so escaped to the United States where they had better chances to make a living and could have a voice in the government. More than a million people came from Ireland in the next ten years. Most of them settled in the cities and towns. Many helped to build our growing cities and the thousands of miles of our roads and railroads. Soon they began to furnish leaders in all fields of American life. The Germans. The people of the little German states also had had several years of bad crops. They had long been oppressed by tyrannical rulers, and in 1848 they revolted and tried to set up a united German republic. This revolt was crushed. Thousands of Germans then turned to America to find the freedom which they could not have in their own country. Many Germans were skilled workmen, much needed in the new factory towns. Many more took up land and became farmers in what we now call the Middle West. These newcomers had much to contribute to America. The Germans brought with them a love of music, an interest in science, and enthusiasm for liberty'. Many of them had been students at German universities which were far ahead of ours at that time. They were soon furnishing both scholars and statesmen to our lists of great American citizens. The War Between the States slowed down the numbers of immigrants to the United States, but the flood of people increased rapidly after the war. In 1873, over 450,000 people came to this country, more than in any one y'ear before the war. The Scandinavians. Many people still came from Germany and Ireland, but now Swedish and Norwegian farmers left their small mountain farms to find on our wide fertile prairies all the land they could use lying ready for the plow. These settlers went into the farm lands of Michigan, Wisconsin, and [ Minnesota. Honest, hard working, and thrifty, these Scandinavians I made great contributions to the building of the Middle West. The Immigrants of Southern and I Eastern Europe. Before 1890, most immigrants came from the nations I of Northern and Western Europe. After 1890 most of our immigrants came from lands in Southern and Eastern Europe — especially Italy, Austria, Poland, and Russia. Austria I and Russia ruled over many subject peoples who wanted more freedom. Some of them, like the Russian Jews, were persecuted for their religion. Few of them had had a chance to learn to read or write or to make a comfortable living. In their home land, they were given almost no share in governing themselves. All this made them want to come to America, but it also made it hard for them to fit themselves quickly for the duties of American citizens. Older Americans complained that these new Americans were slow to become "Americanized." Since the chance to get a farm was now poor, the immigrant had to find a home in one of our large cities or in a mining town. There he often worked and lived side by side with men from his old European home. On his small pay, he had to live in some crowded tenement near his work where Iris neighbors knew no more of American ways than lie. It took him a long time to learn the ways of his adopted country or to feel at home here. People from these countries had had lives of hardship at home. The graph shows the total immigration to our country during ten-year intervals. Because immigration was so great, accommodations on most ships were crowded and poor, but fores were low. in the new land they were afraid to refuse a job, even though wages were very low. In every city, scores of greedy lay in wait for the newcomer to take advantage of his ignorance of our language and our ways. The immigrant was often tricked into signing a contract by which lie would be obliged to work for months, or even for years, at wages that would buy very little indeed, by American standards. Big firms even sent agents to Europe to hire workers. The firm agreed to pay the passage money, and the immigrant agreed to work out the amount at a very low wage. American workmen resented this, as it made it difficult for them to get the wages needed to pay for the things they considered necessary — neat homes, nourishing food, and advantages for their children. The labor unions finally succeeded in getting Congress to forbid this contract labor. Many Americans began to wonder if we had not been growing too fast. In 1890 the census reported no more good farm land for homesteaders. 11 also reported large foreign quarters in big cities. In the Unit 7 past we had been proud of our swift growth. We had wanted large armies of laborers for our expanding industries. Now that the frontier was disappearing, perhaps America should close its doors to newcomers from abroad. Immigration was becoming a problem. Laws to Keep Out Undesirable Immigrants. After 1890 several laws were passed limiting immigration. They aimed at beeping out convicts, lunatics, idiots, paupers, and people with contagious diseases. Anarchists (people who believed all government wrong) were also forbidden to enter. Then in 1917 Congress made a law that every immigrant must pass a literacy test to show that he could read at least his own language. President Cleveland and President Taft had vetoed similar laws, and President Wilson vetoed this one. The three presidents (bought that men of character and ability ought not to be kept out just because they had had no opportunity to go to school in their own country. Congress, however, passed the hill over Wilson's veto. The Chinese Exclusion Act. One of the most difficult problems of immigration had to do with Oriental labor. While white labor was still very scarce in our West, we welcomed Chinese workmen to do the heavy work in building our transcontinental railroads. After the railroads were built, white laborers became more plentiful. Trade unions objected to the Chinese on the West Coast because they "lowered the standard of living" for American labor. After 1882 Chinese workmen were no longer allowed to enter the United States. The Gentleman's Agreement. Some years later, the Japanese began to come to the United States, and again white workmen objected. Misunderstandings arose which threatened to cause trouble with Japan. For many years the United States and Japan had a gentleman's agreement. Japan declared itself quite ready to keep its people away from places where they were not wanted, and it promised to keep its laborers from coming to the United States. This agreement worked very well, hut Congress paid no attention to it in the new immigration law of 1924 which forbade all immigration from Japan. As a result, the Japanese felt that Americans were no longer their friends. The Immigrant — a Builder. Our nerica is what the immigrants from seventeenth to the twentieth Jury have made it. In the years just after the War Between the Sutes, the hundreds of thousands of linavians and Germans helped stum the waste places of our West into thriving farms and prosperous towns. Later, immigrants from Europe and Asia did much of our hardest work — digging tunnels, grading railroad beds, and working in our mines and factories. Skilled workmen from other lands helped to put our growing industry in first place. Chapter 20 In 1890 an American writer described the immigrant as "the American man-of-all-work" — saying: "I contribute eighty-five per cent of all the labor in the slaughtering and meat-packing industries; I do seven-tenths of the bituminous coal mining; I do seven-eighths of all the work- in the woolen mills; 1 contribute nine-tenths of all labor in the cotton mills; I make nineteen-twentieths of all the clothing; I manufacture more than half of the shoes; I build four-fifths of all the furniture; I make half of the collars, cuffs, and shirts; I turn out four-fifths of all the leather; I make half the gloves; I refine nearlv nineteen-twentieths of the sugar; I make nearly half of the tobacco and cigars." The Immigrant — a Contributor to Our Culture. But our foreign- born citizens brought much more than the work of their hands. They made our national life richer by contributing new ideas and customs. They furnished leaders in all lines — poets, artists, musicians, scholars, scientists, inventors, and statesmen. Most of them had firm faith in American ideals of liberty and democracy. Frederick Haskin already quoted on this page, also speaks for the immigrant in the following words: "I looked toward the United States with eager eyes kindled by the fire of ambition and heart quickened with newborn hope. "I approach its gates with great expectation. "I entered in with fine hope." This "fine hope" was sometimes disappointed, when newcomers found themselves lonely and even, perhaps, rudely treated by Americans who had lived here longer. On the other hand, millions of people The Immigrant — a Contributor. Albert Einstein (left), a German, advanced the theory of relativity, a basis for the later development of atomic energy. Edward Bok (right), a Dutchman, became an outstanding journalist and author. Wide World Photo Wide World Phof© have found in America a chance to live in freedom and happiness as they could not do in the lands from which they came. The Immigrant — a Citizen. It is fairly easy for a newcomer to the United States to become an American citizen. Most cities have schools for the study of English and govem- I meat. A man or woman who has lived in the United States for five I years may apply for citizenship. lie must have two sponsors to swear to his good character. The judge of the I naturalization court asks him ques- I tions about American government, I and if replies are satisfactorv, he is then sworn in as a citizen. Meantime his children learn American ways in a public school. His wife may not be able to take time from her household tasks to go to evening classes, but she will manage it if she can, as she will not wish her husband and children to leave her behind in the job of becoming an American. But what do our neighborhoods do? Do we children of earlier immigrants make it easy for strangers to feel at home? Do we see that they get fair treatment in the factory'? Do we welcome them to the school, the church, and the neighborhood? Do we share the good tilings of our community with them and give ourselves a chance to enjoy the contributions to American life made by the newcomers? This is a challenge to each friendly American who believes in fair play, a basic ideal which characterizes the American. Mass Naturalization. New citizens take the oath of allegiance ot a ceremony held by courtesy of the court in a Washington, D. C., hotel as part of the final session of the 13th Annual National Conference on Citizenship. The right to become American citizens has long been a major reason for immigration to this country. Courteiy Immigration and Naturalization Service Chapter 20 " Before moving on to the next chapter, let's stop for just a moment to study two questions. Why did immigrants come to America? What reasons did they have for leaving home and families to seek a new and different life in a new land? America — a "Land of Opportu- nity." Suppose it were possible to ask those questions of a German immigrant in 1690 and a newcomer from Russia in 1890. Their reasons would be much the same. Both might make statements such as: "Religion is an important part of my life. In the old country I was not able to worship God the way I pleased. 1 have heard that in America I shall have this right." "I believe that people should have a voice in the government. In America, I shall have that right." People of all times in our history came for these reasons. America was looked upon (and still is) as the "land of opportunity" for millions of oppressed people the world over. America Seeks Immigration. America did not hesitate in inviting immigrants. Many States eager to develop their resources, advertised for new settlers by passing out posters and pamphlets in many foreign countries. Railroad and steamship companies advertised, too. All over Europe their posters could he seen, urging families to come to the United States. Unfortunately, much of this advertising painted conditions in far too rosy colors; and newcomers often expected ease and comfort, different indeed from what they found. Probably our best advertisers were the immigrants themselves. They wrote hack to their old homes about the splendid chances they were finding in America. As a result, whole villages sometimes migrated from the Old World to the New. In 1905 more than a million Europeans came. Bv 1910 one-third of the total white population of the United States was either foreign-horn or of foreign parents. Eighteenth forbade the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages; the Nineteenth gave the vote to women. Both went into effect in 1920. For the most part, the American people were not interested in carrying on the reforms of Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson. "Good times" were returning. Soon, the people believed, everyone will be prosperous. The great war was over, and the world was safe for democracy. Now the time had come to have some fun. Scandal in the Harding Administration. As we have seen, Warren G. Harding was elected President in 1920. During his administration Congress raised the tariff and cut taxes. After he died suddenly in 1923, the nation was shocked to learn of corruption in the government. People appointed by Ilarding to high positions had used their offices to line their own pockets, and those of their friends. The worst case of corruption was that of Secretary Fall, of the Department of the Interior. He had allowed big oil interests to get hold of Teapot Dome (a government oil reserve in Wyoming) and other government oil lands. In return he had accepted large amounts of money. The Federal government took back the oil lands, but not until 1931 was Fall convicted and sent to prison. "Silent Cal," a Friend to Business. Vice-President Calvin Coolidge took Harding's place and carried on his policies. People liked Coolidge's policy of cutting government expenses and lowering taxes. The taxes on very large incomes were cut the most, for business leaders claimed this would make the whole country more prosperous. At the same time protective tariffs were raised again. In 1924, Coolidge was re-elected. This quiet New Englander had very little to say, but the people thought him honest and sensible. Further Restrictions on Immigration. During World War I, the number of immigrants to the United States dropped drastically. After the war, many Americans did not want millions of new people arriving each The Accuser. Many people believed that one of our notion's great mistakes was the refusal to join the League of Nations ond the Senate's failure to ratify the Treaty of Versailles. This cartoonist pictured the Senate as on assassin. Do you agree with the opinion? Why? Rollin Kirby, Courtesy Boston Public library year. They claimed that immigrants from the war-tom nations of Europe would take jobs from American workers. In 1921, 1924, and 1929 Congress passed laws which put immigrants on a "quota system." This meant that each nation was given a quota — a certain number of people who could enter our country each year. At first the number which would be admitted under the quota system was about half a million annually. By 1930, however, this number was cut to 150,000. Those sanle laws also forbade immigration from any country of Eastern Asia. President Coolidge warned that this was unwise, as our "gentle- men's agreement" with Japan had worked very' well for nearlv twenty years. Bitter feeling arose at once in Japan. The Japanese people felt insulted and hurt. They resented a law that seemed to declare Japanese inferior to Americans. They talked of boycotting American goods, and street riots broke out in Tokyo against Americans living there. They said their countries did not wash to conquer territory. They believed that all peoples should freely choose the form of government they wished. They said they would work for better trade relations so that all peoples might find it easier to get the things they need. They believed that aggressor nations (those who attacked their neighbors) should be disarmed as soon as they were defeated. They believed that as fast as possible "the crushing burden of armaments" should be lightened "for all peace-loving nations." They hoped war could be done away with. They hoped that some system could Chapter 27 515 Toward a Better Future. A UN expert explains machinist skills to a Pakistani (left). A UN nurse examines a painful boil of a young Turk (right). The work of the UN since World War II has aided greatly the improvement of living conditions in underdeveloped nations of the world. everyone. To carry out these aims the UN has six main branches. The General Assembly. The General Assembly is where all member nations are represented and where each nation has one vote. The Assembly meets once a year, and it takes several months to clear up all the fifty or sixty' items of world business that are brought before it. It makes no laws, but it does make many recommendations to member | countries. For example, the Assembly recommended several times that member nations give homes to as many displaced persons as possible (people who were made homeless by the war). Some nations refused to admit any; some were very generous, like orway who took in large numbers tfblind children. The United States had strict immigration laws, but it made special rules so that, for a few years, more displaced persons might come to our country than could have been admitted by our quota system. The Assembly serves as a sort of international town hall. Any subject connected with the peace of the world may be discussed and acted on there, and every delegate has a chance to say what he thinks. Often there are arguments and disagreements. Sometimes countries like the USSR and the United States say extremely unpleasant things about each other. This may seem to be a waste of time, but on the other hand it may be a good thing to have a place where people can relieve their minds with words, instead of taking up guns to shoot each other. 