"A new English nation" was beginning to appear. Captain John Smith complained of the first settlers at Jamestown that they thought of nothing but to "dig gold, wash gold, refine gold, load gold" But the hope of finding quick and easy wealth proved to be a mirage; it turned out that the two great sources of wealth in the thirteen colonies were land and labor. Colonial proprietors learned that the kind of settlers they most wanted were those described by William Penn in a prospectus for Pennsylvania: "industrious Husbandmen and day Laborers ... Carpenters, Masons, Smiths, Weavers, Taylors, Tanners, Shoemakers, Shipwrights, etc." The great attraction of America for such people was the opportunity to own land, and the cheap land available in the English colonies acted like a magnet drawing poor men and women with the ambition to better themselves. Eventually perhaps 90 per cent of the colonists made their living by farming. Although agriculture was everywhere the main pursuit, differences in geography and climate produced different ways of making a living in the various colonies. Three distinct regions appeared: New England, the middle colonies, and the southern colonies. The Southern Colonies: The Plantation System and the Piedmont The chief products of the southern colonies— rice, indigo, turpentine, and above all tobacco—either commanded a ready market in Europe or were needed by the mother country. Except for turpentine, these products were best grown on large estates worked by cheap labor. As a result, a plantation system of agriculture grew up, similar to that in the sugar island of the West Indies. The large-scale farming of the plantations was limited, however, to the tidewater area, where crops could be loaded QUESTION • If a modern American corporation secured a land concession in Africa or South America and sent sonic people there to develop the natural resources, would a colonial government such as that of Virginia develop? With abundant supplies o( oak for beams and pine and spruce for planks and masts, the New England Yankees built sturdy ships that sailed all over the world. Shipbuilding was long a major New England industry. Nearly a quarter of the ships in the British merchant marine were built in New England. Here was that characteristic American phenomenon "the frontier," a region where people were pushing back the wilderness, living partly by fanning and partly by hunting and trapping, in frequent danger from Indian attacks. The people of the pied- mont, poor for the most part, tended to resent the aristocratic planters of the coastal areas. mans invented the Conestoga wagon, a rainy, high-wheeled vehicle which horses or oxen could pull over rough roads; it was the ancestor of the "prairie schooner" winch later carried pioneers to California and Oregon. The back country of nearly all the colonies produced furs and that were not only used here but provided an important export to Europe. The great center of the fur trade wits Albany, New York, where pelts were obtained from French smugglers and from the Iroquois Indians. The "Bread Colonies" The middle colonies, blessed with rich soil and navigable rivers, were sometimes called the "bread colonies." Their principal exports were grain and livestock. These were produced on family-type farms, except in the Hudson Valley, where there were large estates. Pennsylvania attracted some excellent German farmers, the "Pennsylvania Dutch," many of whom have kept their language and traditional ways to this day. To send produce to market, the German New England: Fisheries and Shipping New England, with thin soil and a harsh climate, had tire scantiest natural resources; the region's only important native product was lumber. But the inhabitants developed qualities of thrift, industry, and practical ingenuity that made the term "Yankee" synonymous with these qualities. From the first. New Englanders took to the sea. They exported great quantities of salted fish to the West Indies and to die Mediterranean. By the close of the colonial u n t< it in b; Sr kn % A Free Country in a New World Shortly after 1660, thirteen of the twenty-eight members of the Virginia House of Burgesses were men who had originally come to the colony as indentured servants. The Position of Women A reason for rapid growth of white population in the English colonies was that proportionately more women came to them than to the Spanish and French colonies. The only respectable career for women was thought to be marriage. Colonial women were considered fortunate because they easily found husbands. As in all European societies of the time, women were denied higher education. Their principal task was rearing children. Most of them died during the child-bearing years. Most women were married to farmers, and here they were full partners in their husbands' business. A farm could not carry on without the skills of women in making cloth, garments, candles, soap, and breads tuffs. Life on the frontier also made women more self-reliant. A visitor to the North Carolina-Virginia backcountry in 1710 gave this description of a frontierswoman: . .. she is a very civil woman and shows nothing of ruggedness or Immodesty in her carriage, yet she will carry a gun in the woods and kill deer, turkeys, etc., shoot down wild cattle, catch and try boggs, knock down beeves with an axe and perform the most manful exercises. And what was true of women on the frontier was true elsewhere. Women had more freedom of action and more chance to take part in life outside the home than in England. Colonial laws gave them more protection. In England, for instance, the common law allowed a husband to beat his wife with any "reason- able instrument"; according to Massachusetts law, he could l>eat her only in self-defense. Widespread home manufacturing allowed wives as well as their husbands to learn trades. In the South the mistress of a plantation was a full partner in directing the working force. When seafaring New England husbands left their wives, sometimes for years at a time, women were successful as merchants or storekeepers. Still other women were printers, newspaper publishers, druggists, and doctors. Widespread Prosperity During the first half century or so of colonization, life in English America was hard. A high proportion of those who sailed for these shores died within the first year because of the hardships of the voyage. Settlements were prey to Indian attacks, to starvation from crop failures, to disastrous fires, and to epidemics of smallpox, dysentery, malaria, diphtheria, and yellow fever. By the eighteenth century, conditions were much improved. Epidemics were still common and human life was therefore uncertain, but this was also true in Europe. There was widespread prosperity—a product of cheap land, a ready market for colonial exports, and hard work. Idleness was generally regarded as a sin akin to drunkenness or gluttony. There were no beggars and few paupers. Organized crime was almost unknown, except for occasional piracy on the high seas and banditry on the frontier. It was a society of mixed origins. At first most of the settlers, except for the Dutch and the Negroes, came from England. From about the time of the founding of Pennsylvania in 1681, American prosperity began to attract people of different nationalities and religions— Scots, Irish, Huguenots, Jews, and Germans. Just as there was no class of beggars at the bottom, there was no class of idle rich at the top. Even the wealthiest people, whether New England merchants, Hudson Valley patroons, or Virginia plantation owners, habitually arose at dawn and worked until dark. Chapter 2 Road to Revolution The Revolution was effected before the war commenced. The Revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people. The American Revolution was an unforeseen event. The people of the thirteen colonies had prospered under the mild rule of Britain and had seemed devoted to George III, who came to the British throne in 1760 and who was known to his affectionate subjects as "farmer George." Benjamin Franklin, who knew as much as anyone about colonial opinion, later wrote, "I never heard in any Conversation from any person drunk or sober the least Expression of a wish for Separation or Hint that such a thing would be advantageous to America." Two centuries later historians still argue why the freest colonies of any European nation were the first to rebel. In any case, the revolution had its origins far back in the colonial period. By the mid-1700's most Americans of English descent were three to six generations removed from their immigrant ancestors. The original settlers themselves had not been the most loyal English subjects, since many came here to escape poverty, or imprisonment. Other settlers, such as the Dutch, the Irish, and the Germans, had been either indifferent or anti- British from the first. The colonies had been founded with little help from the British government and had developed their prosperous agriculture and extensive trade on their own initiative. In a fertile area many times larger than the mother country, they were doubling their population every twenty-five or thirty years. They had learned to govern themselves. Above all, they had developed a sense that they were different from Europeans—more free, more able to rise in the world by their own exertions. Ten years before the Americans declared their independence, John Adams wrote, 'T always consider the settlement of America as the opening of a grand scheme and design in Providence for the illumination of the ignorant and the emancipation of the slavish part of mankind all over the earth." One great tie holding the Americans to the mother country was the need for protection. Without aid from Great Britain they had difficulty defending themselves from the French in Canada. Not until France was expelled from North America did the thirteen colonies take the road to revolution. Wolfe's army, including kilted Highlanders (in the far background), scaled the cliffs at Quebec and fought the battle that ended French rule. fields known as the Plains of Abraham. Montcalm was quick to gather a force to meet them. In the ensuing battle, the volleys of the British infantry mowed down the French and Canadians, who were driven back into the town and forced to surrender. Both commanders were mortally wounded in the battle. The fall of Quebec meant the end of the French empire in North America. The Peace of Paris, 1763 Great Britain was equally successful elsewhere, and by the Peace of Paris, which ended the Seven Years' War in 1763, she secured control of the largest amount of territory ever gained by a single nation in a single treaty. From France, Great Britain obtained all of Canada not yielded earlier, and all the eastern watershed of the Mississippi. From Spain, France's ally. Great Britain gained Florida. To repay Spain for her losses, France transferred the Louisiana Territory to her at this time, although in 1800 Napoleon took it back, just before selling it to the United States. On the other side of the globe, Britain gained a dominant position in India. It is no wonder that the British were dazzled by the brilliance of their triumph. "Bum up your Greek and Roman books, histories of little people!" exulted the English author Horace Walpole. From this time dated England's sense of being a great imperial power with a mission to hold "dominion over palm and pine." The French defeat was as bitter as the British victory was exciting. One hundred and fifty years of colonization, all the enterprise and heroism of her great pioneers, missionaries, and soldiers had proved utterly fruitless. There was only one small crumb of comfort—the thirteen colonies might revolt. A French statesman likened them to a "ripe fruit," ready to drop off the bough. Within two years after the Peace of Paris, secret agents of the French government were traveling through the English colonies to investigate the chances of a revolution. With the coming of peace in 1763, Benjamin Franklin wrote verses to celebrate the loyalty of the colonies: Know ye, bad neighbors, who aim to divide The sons from the mother, that she's still our pride. And if ye attack her, were all on her side. Which nobody can deny, deny, Which nobody can deny. Thirteen years later Franklin had completely reversed himself: he was a member of the Continental Congress that declared America's independence of Britain and was fighting a war to make it good. He had been caught up in a revolution. Ask anyone today what comes to mind when you say the words, "American Revolution," and you will usually get some such answer as "redcoats," "Yorktown," or "Don't fire until you see the whites of their eyes." People naturally think of the Revolution in terms of the war against Great Britain. Yet in A Free Country in a New World shadowed by their neighbors. Maryland insisted that the western claims be abandoned as a condition of ratifying the Articles of Confederation. Fortunately, the states with western lands valued the long-time benefits of union more than their short-time selfish interests. In 1781 Virginia and other states agreed to cede their claims to the central government and Maryland finally ratified. The authors of the Articles of Confederation were wary of a strong central government. Having thrown off one master, the British Parliament. they did not intend to put themselves under another. They also feared that a national government would be too far removed from the people; self-government could be successful, they thought, only at the local level. And yet, the Articles of Confederation granted considerable power to a Congress of the United States. The Congress could wage war and make treaties, which the states were forbidden to do. It might raise armies and navies, borrow money, establish a postal system, manage affairs with the Indians, and coin its own money. The states furthermore agreed to "give full faith and credit to the public acts of other states," such as wills and legal decisions, so that citizens of one state could easily do business in another. Each state agreed to return escaped criminals and runaway slaves. There was freedom of movement across state lines: no passports were required for travelers from one state to another and there were no barriers to immigration. Finally, the states agreed that differences between them should be settled not by war, but by arbitration. In spite of the foregoing features, the government of the United States under the Articles proved too weak to operate effectively. There was no separate executive department to carry out laws. There were no federal courts. Congress had no control over foreign commerce or commerce between states. Worst of all, it had no power to collect taxes, but had to ask the states for most of its money. During the years 1781-1789, the states gave Congress only about one-sixth of the money it requested. Without money or real power, the Confederation Congress commanded so little respect that its members often did not bother to attend sessions. In 1783 it was difficult to get a quorum to ratify the Treaty of Paris ending the Revolutionary War. In the same year, the threats of a few hundred unpaid soldiers drove Congress out of Philadelphia. For a time it wandered from place to place, like a troupe of actors, finally settling in New York. One of the blessings of independence that Tom Paine had predicted in Common Sense was that America would at last be free of European rivalries that had dragged her again and again into war. Even before the Treaty of Paris was ratified, the Confederation Congress passed a resolution saying that "the true interest of these states requires that they should be as little as possible entangled in the politics and controversies of European nations." The governments of Europe were quite willing to ignore the upstart new republic; only six of them recognized the United States in the 1780's, and only two, France and Spain, bothered to send ministers to this country. But total isolation from Europe was impossible. The prosperity of the United States depended, after the Revolution as before, on trade with Europe and the Caribbean colonies. Satisfactory trading arrangements demanded that the United States make commercial treaties. There were also unsolved problems connected with British Canada to the north and Spanish Florida and New Orleans to the south, and these could be settled only by diplomacy. It was in its foreign relations that the United States suffered most from the defects 1. Revenue Bills. All Bills for raising Revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the Senate may propose or concur with Amendments as on other Bills. 2. President's Veto. Every Bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it becomes a Law, be presented to die President of the United States; If he approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his Objections to that House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the Objections at large on their Journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If after such Reconsideration two thirds of that House shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together with the Objections, to the other House, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of diat House, it shall become a Law. But in all such Cases the Votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and Nays, and the Names of the Persons voting for and against the Bill shall be entered on the Journal of each House respectively. If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days (Sun- days excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law. 3. Veto Power Extended to Resolutions. Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) shall lie presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him. shall lie repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill. 1. Taxation. The Congress shall have Power To lay and collect Taxes, Duties, Imposts and Excises, to pay the Debts and provide for the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States; but all Duties, Imposts and Excises shall be uniform throughout the United States; 2. Borrou'mg. To borrow Money on the credit of the United States; 3. Regulation of Commerce. To regulate Commerce with foreign Nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian Tribes; 4. Naturalization and Bankruptcies. To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization, and uniform Laws on the subject of Bankruptcies throughout the United States; Launching the Republic bribes to the Directors. Unwilling and unable to produce the money, our commissioners broke off negotiations. When the news of this incident reached the United States, Adams sent an account to Congress, labeling Talleyrand's agents X, Y, and Z. The XYZ Affair produced an outburst of popular anger against France. Adams was cheered when he declared to Congress that he would "never send another minister to France without assurances that he will be received, respected, and honored as the representative of a great, free, powerful, and independent nation* The slogan of the day was a toast by C. C. Pinckney, one of the commissioners: "Millions for defense, but not one cent for tribute." Undeclared War At the beginning of his presidency, Adams had called Congress into special session to strengthen American defenses. A navy department was created. Soon fourteen warships and two hundred privateers were carrying on an undeclared naval war with France. The United States even entered into a sort of unofficial alliance with Great Britain. The British gave the American fleet their system of signals and "lent" it guns and ammunition. When Washington died in 1799, British warships flew the Union Jack at half-mast. The war fever suited many of the leaders of the Federalist party, including Hamilton. It strengthened the power of the central government, made the Federalists popular, and discredited the pro-French Republicans. If war continued, the Federalists could count on winning the election of 1800. Federalists who wished to use the war for partisan advantage failed to reckon with John Adams. The President absolutely refused to subordinate American foreign policy to winning re-election for himself and for his party. As soon as he had word that Talleyrand was willing to receive Amereian diplomats properly, Adams sent to the Senate the nomination of a minister to France, Federalist senators, engaged in a debate over war preparations, were furious, but they could not long oppose an effort to make peace. Eventually, another three-man commission was sent to France, where it was honorably received. The United States demanded $20,000,000 for damages to American shipping and an end to the Treaty of Alliance of 1778. A compromise was reached in 1800 whereby the United States gave up its claim to damages while France agreed to give up the alliance. Thus the United States bought its way out of the only long-time affiance it has ever made with a single nation. Adams's action in making peace against the wishes of most of his party was an act as courageous as his defense of Captain Preston. With understandable pride, he later wrote that he wished no other inscription on his gravestone than, "Here lies John Adams who took upon himself the responsibility of the peace with France in the year 1800." Partisan Legislation Many Federalists had convinced themselves that prominent Republicans were actively and treasonably in league with France, and that the United States was crawling with French "apostles of sedition" who threatened, as one Federalist editor put it, "to bum all our cities and cut the throats of all our inhabitants." In 1798 the Federalist majority in Congress pushed through three laws designed to hurt the Republican party—a Naturalization Act, an Alien Act, and a Sedition Act. Many French and Irish refugees had recently come to America; being anti-British, they usually joined the Republicans. Therefore, the Naturalization Act extended the time necessary for a foreigner to become a citizen from five to fourteen years. The Alien Act reflected the almost hysterical fear of French agents who were thought to be using the Republicans as dupes. It required all foreigners Federalists and Republicans ia5 to register with the federal government and allowed the President to deport without trial any whom he considered "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." The Sedition Act was designed to muzzle the Republican press. It forbade citizens to speak or publish anything false or malicious against the federal government or any of the officers thereof. Violators could be punished by fines up to $5,000 and imprisonment up to five years. Both Adams and Hamilton warned fellow Federalists against abusing their power. As it tamed out, the anti-Republican laws hurt the Federalist party itself more than the intended victim. The Naturalization and Alien acts offended recent immigrants and drove them more than ever to the support of the Republicans. The ten Republicans, mostly newspaper editors, who were jailed under the Sedition Act were bailed by their followers as heroic martyrs to the sacred cause of freedom of the press. Typical of the effect of the Sedition Act was the case of Congressman Matthew Lyon, of Vermont, the editor of a violently anti-Federalist paper. The Scourge of Aristocracy and Repository of Important Political Truths. Lyon was sent to jail for publishing the opinion that President Adams ought to be sent to an insane asylum. While in jail, he was re-elected to Congress. When after his release he set off for Philadelphia, he was accompanied on the first day of his journey by a parade of carriages said to have been twelve miles long. abridging the freedom of speech or of the press." According to this solutions had been put into , effect? theory the Constitution was simply a compact (agreement) among the states to set up the federal government as their agent. It was for the individual states to determine when their agent had exceeded its powers. If a state thought that a federal law went beyond the powers granted to the federal government in the Constitution, it had the right to "nullify" the law—that is, to declare it null and void and to refuse to obey it. To phrase it differently, the state had the right to "interpose" its power to protect its citizens from misuse of federal power. The nullification theory was rightly denounced by other state legislatures as tending to the breakup of the Union. If any state could nullify any federal law it considered unconstitutional, the power of the federal government would cease. The Kentucky and Virginia resolutions were intended, however, simply as campaign material for the presidential election of 1800 and were followed by no action undermining federal authority. Kentucky and Virginia Resolutions, 1798-1799 The Federalists' "reign of terror" under the Sedition Act had given the Republicans an issue. In 1798 and 1799. the Republican-dominated legislatures of Kentucky and Virginia passed resolutions denouncing the act as unconstitutional because it violated the First Amendment, which says. "Congress shall make no law... It was while he was Vice-President under Adams that Jefferson became the active leader of the Republican party. He was in an ideal situation for the task. He was at the center of the government, yet his job as Vice-President carried with it very few official duties. Through personal contact with members of Congress and through thousands of letters, he kept in touch with Republicans all over the country. Federalists and Republicans as an opponent of Hamilton's financial policies Jefferson would prevent repayment to the bondholders. Jefferson liked to speak of his election to the presidency in 1800 as a "revolution." It was perhaps a resolution in the sense that men who distnisted democracy were replaced by those who believed in it, but it was surely one of the mildest revolutions in all history. Not only was there no violence, but surprisingly little Federalist legislation was repealed. The Alien and Sedition acts had already run out and were not renewed; the period necessary for naturalization was reduced from fourteen years to five. The excise tax on whiskey was .abolished. The major features, however, of Hamilton's financial program remained untouched: the Bank of the United States, the Funding Act, and the assumption of state debts. Jefferson hoped to do away with the federal debt not by canceling it but by paying it off rapidly. The money to do this was found by practicing the strictest economy in government. The regular army was reduced to 3,000 men, and it was proposed to put almost the entire navy in dry dock. Once in control of the federal administration, the Republican leaders found that their new role of being in power instead of in opposition pushed them toward modifying or even violating some of their previously expressed principles of government. Jefferson, for instance, professed to fear executive power, and in his Inaugural Address hinted that he would allow Congress to guide policy. He reduced the symbolic dignity of the presidency. He made gestures toward giving Congress more: detailed control of the executive departments, but he soon found that if he did not give leadership, bis party would break into factions. He therefore used his position as party leader to influence congressional legislation. By consultation with Republican leaders in Congress, and by seeing that his supporters gained key positions, Jefferson became just as much "chief legislator" as Washington had been. Similarly, Jefferson professed to fear extension of the power of the federal government, but, as the next chapter will show, when he felt he had to choose between the welfare of the nation and his principles, he chose the former. Thus he illustrated the fact that the "outs" tend to be strict constructionists, because they want to prevent action by their opponents who control the federal government, while the "ins" are apt to be loose constructionists, because they are in power and wish to act. Attack on the Federal Judiciary The congressional elections of 1800 gave the Republicans safe majorities in both the House and Senate, and they were thus in a position to repeal any Federalist legislation they disliked. But the only point at which they made a major attempt to undo the work of their predecessors was in trying to reduce the power of the federal judiciary and to drive some judges from office. The Republicans feared the judiciary' for a number of reasons: (1) Federal judges, holding their positions "during good behavior" (which meant for life), svere beyond the control of the people. (2) The federal courts had declared several state laws unconstitutional and so were a means of strengthening the power of the federal government and reducing that of the states. (3) During their last month in office, the Federalists had "packed" the judiciary. They increased the number of federal judges by the Judiciary Act of 1801, and Adams promptly filled 67 positions with members of his party. These new judges were known as "midnight judges," because the story w'ent that Adams signed appointments until midnight of his last day in office. One of the first acts of Congress after Jefferson came into office w'as to repeal the Judiciary Act of 1801. After doing away with the "midnight judges" by abolishing their of- 200 Launching the Republic days to reach an agreement by which the United States was to pay about $15,000,000 for a region which would double the size of the United States. Was the Purchase Constitutional? When news of French willingness to sell this vast territory reached the United States, Jefferson was tom between joy over a magnificent bargain and worry over the constitutional powers of the federal government. Although the right to acquire new territory is nowhere stated in the Constitution, Jefferson had already convinced himself that the federal government possessed such a power. What really worried him was a provision in the Louisiana Purchase treaty which stated that Louisiana was to be "incorporated into the Union" and its inhabitants were to become citizens of the United States. If the treaty were carried out, it meant that the executive department, with the consent of the Senate, assumed the right to admit aliens to citizenship. Yet under the Constitution the powers of admitting new states and naturalizing foreigners were clearly reserved to Congress. Jefferson urged a constitutional amendment to remove any doubts about the legality of the Louisiana Purchase treaty. His followers in the cabinet and Congress pointed out that time was pressing and that Napoleon might change his mind. Waiting for the slow processes of a constitutional amendment might lose Louisiana altogether. Jefferson therefore agreed to submit the treaty to the Senate. His strict-construction- ist principles were thus sacrificed to the immense benefits which the Louisiana Purchase brought to the fanners of the West by acquiring the mouth of the Mississippi, and to the whole nation by averting difficulties with France. The Senate approved the greatest real estate bargain in history in October 1803, and American officials took over from the French in De cember. Just what territory the United States had acquired was still, however, not clear. Did the purchase include "West Florida" (see map, p. 175)? Did it include Texas? No one knew for sure. These uncertainties were likely to cause difficulty later. None could doubt the tremendous significance of the Louisiana Purchase in spite of its vague boundaries. The annexation of this vast area made the United States master of one of the largest and most fertile river valleys in the world. There could no longer be much doubt that, if it could remain united, the United States would dominate North America and expand to the Pacific. Suppose Jefferson had refused to buy Louisiana. Would it have reverted to Spain? Become a new French empire? Been captured by the British and added to Canada? Later have been acquired by the United States? Exploratory Expeditions, 1804-1806 Very little was known about the area west of the Mississippi, and it excited Jefferson's curiosity. The first scientific project to receive federal funds was the expedition sent up the Missouri River under Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, officers in the United States Army. Jefferson himself drew up their instructions. He told them to find the sources of the Missouri, to try to find a practicable route across the Rockies to the Pacific, to observe the customs of the Indians they met, and to make detailed zoological, mineralogical, geological, and meteorological observations. The expedition, numbering 29 "robust healthy hardy young men," as Clark described them, started from St. Louis in May 1804, in three boats. They returned over two years later with their mission accomplished, having surmounted hardships ranging from "ticks and musquiters" to near- History, it has often been remarked, is but a fable agreed upon. In American history, a generally accepted part of the fable has been that 1815 marked a turning point. But what, it may be asked, was so special about the year 1815? Did Americans suddenly and collectively turn their backs on Europe? Were they ever in fact "free of foreign entanglements"? Were they not still part of an Atlantic community being drawn ever closer together as steamships replaced sailing ships, as wheat from the Dakotas and pork from Indiana began to feed Liverpool and London, and as an ever-increasing flood of European Immigrants poured into American ports? And yet the fable that a great change had started in 1815 was itself a fact. Americans thought they were isolated from Europe; indeed, they congratulated themselves upon it The millions of immigrants seeking a new life in America often strengthened American isolationism because they sought to escape from their past. It took two world wars in the twentieth century to shock Americans out of the belief that with the close of the Napoleonic Wars the United States had no further need to concern itself with European politics. Or consider the myth that men make history while women wash the dishes. History books have so consistently left half the human race out of account that Henry Adams remarked, "History is useful to the historian by teaching him his ignorance of women." Notice that to Adams himself historian meant "he." The very word "pioneer" conjures up the picture of a man in coonskin cap and leather jacket armed with a rifle. But as you trace the march of the frontier from the Appalachians to the Pacific, we now see that there were women pioneers too. Left to himself, the man on the frontier often left behind his usual customs and way of life. It was the women who turned cabins into homesteads, planted flowers outside the doors, and put curtains in the windows. It was usually the mothers and schoolteachers who transmitted to the next generation the heritage of the past. It was, nevertheless, a man's world insofar as men could make it so. By law, the husband legally ruled the wife. Rigid taboos dictated women's clothing and freedom of action. Small wonder, then, that some brave women demanded equal rights with men and started a revolution that continues to the present. The embattled feminists who met at Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848 appealed to the principles and used the phrases of 1776. Thus, each generation must find new uses for the Declaration of Independence, or it too could become a fable. Forces for Union and Disunion In war we are one people. In making peace we are one people. In all commercial relations we are one and the same people. In many other respects the American people are one. Always the tree range and diversity—always the continent ol Democracy— Always the prairies, pastures, forests, vast cities, travelers The year 1815 saw the beginning of a century of peace in Europe that lasted with few interruptions until the outbreak of World War I in 1914. For nearly a century no warring nations preyed on the foreign commerce of the United States or violated our neutral rights. Apparently free of foreign entanglements, Americans turned their backs on Europe. "The continent lay before them," wrote the historian Henry Adams, "like an uncovered ore-bed." The conquest of the continent was for the most part not a matter of military force, although it involved us in numerous Indian wars and a war with Mexico. Instead, it was a struggle between people and their environment—the conquest of eastern forests by the axe?, of the prairies by the plow, of vast distances by canals, steamboats, and railroads. Lured by the promise of a better life, millions of Europeans came to America, and within America the people were on the move. Helping to promote these developments came the greatest technological change in the history of humankind—the industrial revolution. The expansion of the United States created political problems, of which the most obvious was that of holding the Union together. In all history such a huge area as the United States had seldom been ruled effectively by a single government—never by a government of the people, The survival of the United States as one country was a product of many forces. The Americans were fortunate to inherit a common language and common institutions. The territory they inhabited was immense, but at least from the Atlantic coast to the Rocky Mountains it is one of the most unified geographical areas in the world. Much of it lies within the flat watershed of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, the Maryland Historical Association The Union Manufactories of Maryland, about 1812. Not all of America's early textile factories were in New England. This Maryland plant was established during the Embargo, when it was necessary to produce at home many goods previously obtained abroad. Here 600 employees tended 80,000 spindles driven by 16 water wheels. investment in new enterprises. But New England's principal resource was human. In over two centuries of wresting a living from an unpromising environment in a harsh climate. New Englanders had developed traits that made the term "Yankee" a synonym for ingenuity, thrift and hard work. Unable to meet the competition from newly cleared, more fertile farm regions in the West, many Yankees moved to factory towns. By 1840, some 700 cotton mills and 500 woolen mills in New England employed about 50,000 workers. There were also many small factories turning out products such as shoes, clocks, carriages, and paper. All this was, however, just a beginning. There were in the region as many people engaged in shipping as in manufacturing, and even more engaged in farming. In the Middle Atlantic states—Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York—manufacturing took hold even more than in New England. The new transportation system opened western markets, and European immigrants supplied much cheap labor. There were textile factories in this region, although not as many as in New England. The area was the great center of the iron industry and of the manufacture of machinery. Early Effects of the Industrial Revolution The beginnings of the industrial revolution had several important effects: (1) Existing cities, such as New York and Philadelphia, grew rapidly; at power sites new cities appeared, such as Lowell and Lawrence at falls and rapids on the Merrimac River. (2) There was a great demand for better transportation to carry food and raw materials to the cities and manufactured goods to markets. (3) The cities provided new markets for farm products. (4) There Forces for Union and Disunion hint in the towns, he betakes himself where he can be monarch of all he surveys. Land was everywhere cheap. Many settlers did not even bother about survey lines and "squatted" on whatever unoccupied acres they could find. So the settlers poured into the Northwest. From the South came independent fanners and impoverished whites anxious to get away from slavery and the plantation system. From the northeastern states came farmers lured by tales of the almost unbelievable fertility of the western lands. Eventually, Europe supplied a third stream of immigrants, who often landed at New York and traveled west by the Erie Canal. Typical citizens of tire northwestern states lived on their own farms, which were cultivated by themselves and their family. On the very edge of the frontier, they might live in an open-sided lean-to. Killing the trees by "gir- dling'' (cutting the bark all around at the base in order to let in the sun), they would plant a crop of com. They might also raise a few nzorback hogs, which would be allowed to run practically wild in the woods. For the rest, they lived on game. In longer-settled areas, farmers j would probably build a frame house. They j would then raise more varied crops and acquire cash by sending their products to market. Growth of Towns and Cities But farmers alone did not develop the West. They could not prosper entirely by their own efforts. They needed sawmills for lumber and flour mills for grain. They needed barges and wagons to carry produce to market, merchants to buy it, and storekeepers to provide the goods they could not make themselves, such as glassware, shoes, lamps, and iron tools. These people, as has been pointed out earlier, gathered in towns usually situated at points of transshipment. Among these were Cincinnati (near where three tributaries pour into the Ohio River), Louisville (at the Falls of the Ohio), and Nashville (at the head of steam navigation on the Cumberland River). Manufacturing sprang up in such cities. The showpiece of Cincinnati at one time was a combined flour and textile mill run by a steam engine. This "stupendous pile" of stone and brick reached the then amazing height of nine stories. The largest manufacturing center, however, was Pittsburgh. Here were glass factories, which in 1815 produced glassware worth $235,000. Even more important were Pittsburgh's iron works. In western towns, people could often make money more rapidly than on the farms. Skilled workers such as masons and wheelwrights were so scarce that they demanded, and got, high wages. Manufacturers could charge high prices because the demand for their articles was always increasing and because the cost of transporting goods across or around the Appalachians acted as a sort of tariff, raising the price of eastern goods. Western towns offered such prospects of wealth that selling lots in future cities became a standard way for speculators to fleece suckers. Glowing descriptions of town sites were satirized in a southern editor's imaginary prospectus of the "City of Skunksburgh": This charming place ... is situated ... not far from the junction ol Pitt's main branch, and a Western fork called the Slough, which runs in the rainy season, and washes the confines of Farnsworth's lower hog pens. A noble bluff of 18 inches commands the harbor... . Commodious and picturesque positions will be reserved for the Exchange and City Hall, a church, one Gymnastic and one Polytechnic foundation, one Olympic and two Dramatic thea- tres, an Equestrian circus, an observatory, two marine and two Foundling Hospitals, and in the most commercial part of the city will he a reservation for seventeen banks, to each of wliich may be attached a lunatic Hospital.... A line of Velocipede stages will be immediately established from Skunksburgh straight through the The Nation and the Sections of a federal union had apparently solved the problem of bringing independent states into combination, and since the United States was in no danger from her neighbors, it was natural for Americans to think that universal peace was attainable. In 1828 the American Peace Society was formed to promote international understanding. Its principal founder was William Ladd, who abandoned a successful career, first as ship captain and then as farmer, to devote his entire energy to the cause of peace. Ladd agitated for a Congress of Nations with courts of international justice to settle all disputes. From Europe at this period came a new idea—socialism. This was a revolt against the poverty and inequality which socialists blamed on business competition and individual ownership of property. Socialists proposed to substitute cooperation for competition and common ownership for individual ownership. The early followers of the idea proposed to start small, voluntary communities where their ideas could be put into practice. Most of these experiments took place in the United States because land was so easy to acquire here. A famous English socialist, Robert Owen, started a cooperative venture at New Harmony, Indiana. Even more influential than he were the disciples of the Frenchman, Charles Fourier, who proposed to organize society into "phalanxes" of just 1,620 people, living in villages called "phalan- steries." His converts included Horace Greeley, editor of the New York Tribune, the most widely read newspaper in the United States. Since the labor movement of the 1830's had failed to get the workers better wages or more security, a few labor leaders were ready to fry socialism. Many intellectuals, repelled by the ugly aspects of the factory system, were also interested. Eventually almost forty Fourierist communities were started, but most of them quickly collapsed. The "phalanxes" were too often composed of individuals without organizing ability or manual skills. There were quarrels about the division of labor. Without the profit motive, it was found difficult to get people to work hard enough to produce the goods on which life depends. Although socialism had aroused great fear among property owners, its first appearance in the United States turned out to be a failure. The first half of the nineteenth century saw a great variety of religious movements in the United States. In New England the Unitarians revolted against the stem Puritanism of the Congregational Church. Instead of considering people totally depraved, the Unitarians insisted that they were by nature good. Throughout the country, the immense growth of Protestant denominations, especially the Baptists and the Methodists, was marked by great revival meetings, the building of thousands of new churches, and the founding of scores of colleges and universities. In the cities, the coming of thousands of European immigrants brought a corresponding growth of the religions they professed. In Boston and New York, for instance, the Roman Catholic Church provided not only places of worship, but also schools, orphanages, and charitable organizations. Alexis de Tocqueville, a French political scientist who made a close study of American institutions during the Jacksonian period, observed that American ministers of all faiths did "not attempt to draw or to fix all the thoughts of man upon the life to come." Life on earth was no longer a mere preparation for the hereafter; instead, people had the capacity and the duty to improve the environment in which God had placed them. Thus the new religious spirit was often intimately tied to the spirit of A big advantage of railroads over canals was, of course, that railroads operated in winter, when canal traffic, except in the South, was tied up by ice. To the left may be seen the Chinese workers who provided much of the main muscle power for building the railroads of the West. come an important means of transportation immediately, partly because they aroused opposition. A typical canal man's speech contained this passage: Canals, sir, are God's own highway, operating on the soft bosom of the fluid that comes straight from nature. The railroad... is the Devil's own invention, compounded of fire, smoke, and dirt, spreading its infernal poison throughout the fair countryside. It will set fire to houses along its slimy tracks.... It will leave the land despoiled, ruined, a desert where only sable buzzards shall wing their loathsome way. Railroads were opposed on the ground that such frightful speeds as fifteen, twenty, and even thirty miles an hour were against nature and contrary to the will of God. Early railroads were handicapped by numerous practical problems. It was difficult, for instance, to devise suitable rails—rails which would neither spread under the weight of a train nor bend and come up through the floor of the car. A train was hard to stop: if the brake worked on the engine, the cars piled into it; if the cars were braked first, they dragged back so hard as to break the couplings. Almost everything one takes for granted on railroads today—brakes, couplings, headlights, effective lubrication of the wheels, and safe bridges—had to he worked out by painful trial and error. Furthermore, railroads were extremely expensive to build and maintain. The Panic of 1837, caused partly by overexpansion in canal and turnpike building, made both state governments and private investors wary of sinking money into a new form of transportation. By 1850 many of the technical problems of railroading had been met, and an era of great expansion began. Before 1853 it was impossible to make a continuous journey of as much as 500 miles on any American railroad. By 1860 the Atlantic seaboard and the Mississippi River system were connected by a number of through routes. The railroad network had increased iD mileage from 9,000 in 1850 to over 30,000 in 1860. The new railroads cost what then seemed colossal sums. The Erie Railroad cost about $23,000,000 to build, half again as much as the United States paid for New Mexico and California. The railroad corporations thus became the first outstanding examples of "big business." Linking the Middle West and the Northeast The through lines from the East to the Middle West completed a development which the Erie Canal had begun: the conquest of the Appalachian Mountain harrier. Because of the Mississippi River system, the natural economic ties of the Middle West had at first been with the South. Now, due to the railroads, the two sections drew together economically and politically. "This fact," says the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, "far more than abolitionist agita- From Compromise to Conflict 329 tion, was to account for northern unity when southern guns boomed out against Fort Sumter in 1861- One of the necessities for the take-off into sustained industrial growth is a mobile labor supply, free of attachments to long traditions of social organization or of craftsmanship, and willing to move from place to place. Many Americans had these qualities, and their numbers were supplemented by an increasing flood of immigrants. Until about 1800, immigrants to the United States were not numerous, averaging about 8,000 persons per year. But during the second quarter of the nineteenth century, a great migration began from Europe to America. Between 1840 and 1860 an average of over 200,000 immigrants reached our shores yearly; by the latter date, one out of every eight Americans was foreign-born. Reasons for Flood of Immigration Most of the immigrants fled poverty or oppression. In England and Germany the industrial revolution put thousands of skilled workers out of jobs. Rather than go into factories. Samuel Morse, Artist and Inventor On May 24, 1844, Samuel Finley Breese Morse sent a message over wires stretching 40 miles from Washington, D.C.. to Baltimore. His words, "What hath God wrought!" proved to all that the telegraph was workable. The speed of communication leaped forward. One of the first important uses of electricity, the telegraph introduced the electronic age. Morse, its inventor, was immensely honored In his day and earned a lasting place in history. Yet, untrained in science, often ignorant of the principles and theories of his field, he drew heavily on the work of others, sometimes without fitting acknowledgment. One of his biographers notes: "Morse was almost blissfully unaware of his own ignorance.... He lacked the mechanical skill to make his own materials with any professional finesse " It is not hard to understand. Morse was trained in the fine arts. Born in 1791 in a Massachusetts parsonage, he early persuaded his father to send him to Europe to study painting. He wrote home that his ambition was "to rival the genius of a Raphael, a Michelangelo, or a Titian." He did, in fact, become a highly skilled artist, but the American public would buy only his portraits. They earned him some respect and a fair income, but Morse considered them mere "copying." Spectacularly improvident, he reluctantly took a job teaching sculpture and painting at New York University. There he abandoned brush and palette for batteries and magnets, turning his rooms into a maze of wires. From his experiments came the telegraph, and. with his life more than half over, he won success— in a field he never fully understood. Dromon and Reunion many of these preferred to leave home. In 1848-1849 there were unsuccessful revolutions in Europe, especially in the German states, followed by persecution of those believing in democracy. Many German liberals fled to this country. In Scandinavia and the Netherlands there was too little soil to support rapidly growing populations. In Ireland, the greatest source of immigrants, the native population was denied home rule, and a wretched system of landholding kept them in poverty. The staple diet of Irish peasants was potatoes. When the potato crop was blighted in 1845, there was appalling suffering. It has been estimated that one million out of eight million died of starvation; in the next ten years, another million came to America. Some immigrants actually came to this country against their will. The German city of Hamburg, for instance, found it cheaper to ship its paupers to the United States than to keep them in poorhouses or in jails. Public and private relief agencies in Britain provided money for the unemployed to take passage to America rather than go into the dreaded "work- houses," where poverty was treated as though it were a crime. Most immigrants came here, however, in high hopes of a better life. European agents of railroad companies and steamship lines described America as a land where riches could be had almost for the asking. Several states established immigration agencies to attract foreigners by such inducements as offering the right to vote to newcomers even before they became naturalized. But perhaps the most persuasive inducements to come to this country were the "America letters" written by recent immigrants to the folks back in their old homes. "The poorest families," wrote one correspondent, "adorn the tables three times a day like a wedding dinner—tea, coffee, beef, fowls, pies, eggs, pickles, good bread ... Say, is it so in England?" The letters praised not only the prosperity of America, but its freedom and equality. Here, they said, there were no class distinctions. No man had to tip his hat to the local squire, and workers could leave jobs if they did not like the boss. Women were not expected to do heavy work in the fields. "If you wish to be happy and independent, then come here," wrote a German farmer from his new home in Missouri. Difficulties Faced by Immigrants The move to America was often difficult and dangerous. On the voyage over, immigrants were packed into the steerage under conditions little better than those on board the ships that brought slaves from Africa. It is estimated that nearly 10 per cent of the steerage passengers died on the way over from malnutrition and disease. Once off the boat, their troubles were not over. They might become the prey of swindlers selling bogus railroad tickets or "farms" that later turned out to be under water. So many people made a business of cheating recent arrivals that a Swedish minister remarked, "the American competes with the mosquitoes to bleed the emigrant." Even after they had found jobs and places to live, immigrants had to deal with the settled prejudices of established Americans. Some pious folk disapproved of the way Gcrman-Americans spent Sunday afternoons listening to band concerts. American laborers resented the Irish who were forced by poverty to accept lower wages. Employers would sometimes put signs at factory gates or in windows, "No Irish need apply." The Irish workers also, faced a religious prejudice so strong that it frequently broke out against them in mob violence. Immigrants met organized opposition from a nation-wide secret society, the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, founded in 1849. The members of this organization were called "Know Nothings," because when asked about it they replied, "I know nothing." The Know Nothings From Compromise to Conflict 331 tried to keep recent immigrants from political office. They demanded that immigration be restricted and that the naturalization period be extended to twenty-one years. The natural tendency of immigrants facing prejudice and grappling with the insecurity of a new environment was to draw together and keep to their old culture. This was reflected in the appearance of foreign-language newspapers. In New York City' alone in 1851 there were seven such papers—four German, one French, one Italian, and one Spanish. In spite of hardships, prejudice, and attempts to cling to their old ways, most immigrants adapted themselves rapidly to America. Jobs were abundant and land was cheap. Familiar with tyranny and want, the recent arrivals often appreciated American freedom and well-being more than did those whose ancestors had come over here generations earlier. Immigrants made many valuable contributions to the arts in America, to journalism, to education, and to invention. The children of foreign-born parents were quickly Americanized in the public schools, where they were taught English and learned to get along with children of different backgrounds and upbringing from their own. Blacks in the North There was one group of people in the North ' whose status resembled the immigrants in that they faced prejudice and dislike, even though their ancestors had been here for several gen- erations-the blacks. Although they had long since been freed, northern Negroes were generally denied the right to vote and hold public office, to enter the professions and skilled crafts, and to send their children to any but segregated schools. They had to stand on the outside platform on streetcars and use only certain cars on railroad trains. Some states even forbade Negroes to enter their borders. Although the a few local successes, especially in New England, northern blacks on the eve of the Civil War were second-class citizens. By the 1850's, British textile machinery had become so efficient that it produced cloth cheap enough to be sold profitably to the poverty- stricken millions of Asia and Africa. The resulting demand for raw cotton brought prosperity to the deep South. In the decade of the 1850's cotton production broke all previous records. As new plantations were cleared in Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas, the yield rose from less than 2,000,000 bales in 1849 to 4,540,000 bales in 1859. Seven-eighths of the world's supply came from the United States, and raw cotton comprised three-fifths of the nation's exports. The 1850's also witnessed a revival of tobacco growing. This resulted from the discovery by Stephen, a black overseer in North Carolina, of a new method of curing that greatly improved the product. This "bright yellow" tobacco could be grown on lighter soils than had been worked formerly, and it was so much better that it sold for four times the former price. The result was a great increase in tobacco acreage. Because it devoted most of its capital and labor force to the growing of staples, the South did not experience the industrial take-off of the North. It was also out of step with the North in other ways. On three important issues—a protective tariff, internal improvements at federal expense, and the grant of free land to homesteaders—southern opinion was opposed to the dominant sentiment among Northerners. But what most set the South apart from the North—indeed, from most of the civilized world —was its "peculiar institution," Negro slavery. The "Peculiar Institution" The slave system as it had developed by the lS50's was based on the assumption that slavery was the natural and best condition for blacks. Criticism of the system had been silenced in the South. State legislatures made it increasingly difficult for owners to emancipate their slaves, and the lot of free blacks became worse. Some states went so far as to decree that free blacks must either go somewhere else or be sold back into slavery. The bondage of blacks assumed many forms. Between house servants and their masters and mistresses there was often intimacy and mutual affection. Some slaves, especially in the cities, were hired out and enjoyed some freedom of movement. The entire working force of the highly successful Tredegar Iron Works in Richmond was black. The overseer of the John C. Calhoun plantation, Fort Hill, was a trusted slave. But most blacks worked on plantations. Their lives were marked by Hard labor, cruel discipline, and isolation. They were not allowed to contract valid marriages. Families could be broken up by sale. It was against the law to teach slaves to read. In spite of all handicaps, the slaves created i rich culture of their own. They put together those features of the African heritage they brought with them and the white culture they found here. A most valuable part of the white culture was the Christian religion. Teaching that all people are equal before God and that the just will be rewarded in Heaven, Christianity was a solace. Although their case at times must have seemed hopeless, the slaves never lost the idea that some day they would achieve freedom. From the Bible they learned the story of Moses, who delivered his people from Egyptian bondage. Moses became a hero ol the slaves. This-can he seen by the chorus of the noble spiritual, "Go down, Moses": Co down, Moses, Way down in Egypt's land. Tell old Pharaoh, "Let my people go!" The few people who owned slaves in quantity did make some money out of the slave system. The rise in the price of "prime field hands" from $300 in 1790 to $1,800 in 1860 was evidence that slaves were a valuable commodity. But the system was costly for the South. It was inefficient. It lowered the dignity of work and drove down the wages of white workers. Europeans were so repelled by slavery that immigrants tended to shun the South. So great was the constant fear of insurrection that a good deal of energy was devoted simply to keeping slaves under observation. AH blacks, bond and free, had to be supplied with passes when away from their homes. At night there were patrols, equipped with dogs and guns, to see that slaves were under cover. Southern Defense of Slavery More and more the South became isolated from world opinion, as slaves were emancipated in the British Empire and most of Latin America, and as abolitionist sentiment grew in the North. Instead of backing down or apologizing, some of the best minds in the South developed an elaborate defense of slavery designed to prove the assertion of Calhoun that the institution was "instead of an evil, a good—a positive good." They invented a pseudo-anthro- pology that asserted the Negro to be innately inferior, even a different species of person, and peculiarly adapted to bondage. They insisted that the plantation slave was "as happy as a human being can be." The master's interest prevents his reducing the slave's allowance or wages in infancy or sickness, for he might lose the slave by so doing. His feeling for his slave never permits him to stint him in old Division and Reunion southern senators, Douglas included in the law a clause that specifically repealed the Missouri Compromise ban on slavery north. By inference this accorded with the southern contention that Congress had no right to legislate slavery out of the territories. The results of the Kansas-Nebraska Act were disastrous. Repeal of the Missouri Compromise was denounced in the North as the violation of a solemn compact and an attempt to extend 'legalized oppression and systematic injustice over a vast territory yet exempt from these terrible evils." The South continued to demand that the North recognize the rights of slaveholders in the territories of the United States. Settlers started at once to move into the Kansas Territory, It became a race to see whether the majority would come from the slave or free states. Northern settlers were assisted by an abolitionist organization, the Emigrant Aid Society, which supplied wagons, tools, livestock, farm machinery—and rifles. Meanwhile a pro-slavery secret society, the Blue Lodge, sent armed men from Missouri into Kansas. The struggle between the proslavery and antislavery factions began to assume the proportions of a civil war. The Election of 1856 The violence in "bleeding Kansas" reached its height on the eve of the presidential election of 1856. In the two years since the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, the Whig party had broken up because of friction between pro- slavery "Cotton" Whigs of the South and antislavery "Conscience" Whigs of the North. To fill the void, two new parties appeared—the American and the Republican. The American party, composed of Know Nothings plus some ex- Whigs, tried to divert people's minds from the slavery issue by whipping up feeling against immigrants. Its candidate in 1856 was former President Fillmore. The basic principle of the Republicans (who took their name from the party of Thomas Jefferson) was "free soil"—keep slavery out of the territories. Free soil appealed both to abolitionists, who did not like slavery, and to many white farmers and laborers who feared that slavery would lower their standard of living. Strongly organized in every free state, the Republicans nominated a popular hero, General John C. Fremont. Meanwhile, the Democrats followed the practice of dodging the slavery issue. To balance the fact that Southerners dominated the party, the nomination went to a Northerner, James Buchanan, of Pennsylvania. Though polling a minority of the popular vote, the Democrats won the election with 174 electoral votes for Buchanan against 114 for Fremont and 8 for Fillmore. The result of the election of 1856 was ominous in that the voting was clearly sectional. The Democrats swept the South and gained enough votes to win. Fremont won two-thirds of the electoral votes of the free states. The Dred Scott Decision, 1857 In his inaugural address in March 1857, President Buchanan suggested that the question of the status of slavery in the territories be settled by the Supreme Court. Buchanan had foreknowledge that the Court was soon to deliver an opinion on this question in the case of Dred Scott v. Sandford. Dred Scott was a slave taken by a former master from the state of Missouri into territory closed to slavery by the Missouri Compromise and then brought back. For over ten years, Scott, with the financial support of abolitionists, sued for freedom on the ground that residence in free territory released him from slavery. Seven of the nine justices were Democrats; five were Southerners. On March 6, 1857, Chief Justice Roger Taney, supported by the Democratic justices, delivered an opinion completely upholding the southern point of From Compromise to Conflict horror, since they feared nothing so much as a slave revolt. They were shocked to learn that Brown had been financed by some northern abolitionists. But many Northerners regarded Brown as a martyr to human freedom; Emerson said that he had "made the gallows glorious like the cross." Southern fears were increased by the publication, in 1857, of The Impending Crisis of the South, by Hinton R. Helper, the son of a North Carolina blacksmith. Helper attacked slavery above all because it enriched a few "slaveocrats" at the price of dooming non-slaveholding whites to "galling poverty and ignorance." He called (in small farmers to revolt against "the lords of (lie lash," to tax slavery out of existence, and to send all the blacks back to Africa. By its threat of internal disunion. The Impending Crisis alamied leaders of the South even more than Uncle Tom's Cabin. Southern states banned the book from the mails, while the Republican party distributed 100,000 copies as a campaign document. The Election of 1860 As the election of 1860 approached, the Democrats split over the issue of slavery in the territories. A northern wing of the party nominated Douglas for the presidency and backed popular sovereignty; a southern wing nominated John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky and supported the Dred Scott decision. A third group, the Constitutional Union party, especially strong in the lrorder states, nominated John Bell of Tennessee and attempted to avoid the slavery issue. Tliis party was composed mostly of fonner southern Whigs. With such division among their op{x>ncnts, idle way was wide open for the Republicans. They made good use of their opportunity. Their platform was designed to attract votes from many quarters. Although continuing to demand exclusion of slavery from the territories, it an- Thls Is the momentous election over which the Union was divided. Note the severe sectional division: the North tor Lincoln, the South for Breckinridge, the border states, hoping to avoid trouble, voting tor Bell or for Douglas. gled for conservative support by denying any intention to disturb slavery in the southern states and by denouncing John Brown's raid as "among the gravest of crimes." The degree to which former Whigs had moved into positions of leadership in the Republican party was shown by the way the platform emphasized an updated version of Henry Clay's American System, including a protective tariff, free homesteads for actual settlers, and federal funds for internal improvements, ineluding a railroad to the Pacific. It sought to attract recent immigrants by denouncing Know-Nothing attempts to make naturalization more difficult. In choosing a candidate the Republicans passed over the more prominent William II. Seward, senator from New York, and nominated Lincoln. They tried to play down the slavery issue by imitating the "Tippecanoe and Tyler too" campaign of 1840. There were torchlight parades with boys carrying rails and singing about "Honest Abe the Railsplitter," who was born in a log cabin. On his part, Lincoln was Technological problems vexed railroads from the beginning. Braking, slack control, and coupling (shown above) were a few of the many problems that had to be solved before railroads could fulfill their potential. brought up to traditional occupations and hated to leave their home villages. In the United States, labor was more mobile. The American tradition was to "keep moving." Laborers came to new jobs in new cities the way pioneers moved into new lands. Furthermore, the flood of immigration continued; the newcomers, already uprooted from their homes and traditions, supplied much of the "floating" labor force that industry demanded. The native American workers were noted for the ease with which they learned new processes, and the immigrants such as English textile workers, Welsh miners, and Italian farmers often brought with them important skills. Government policies. The Constitution gave American industrialists an advantage when it forbade the states to levy tariffs. This prohibition resulted in an immense home market—the largest free trade area in the world. Compare this with western Europe, where nearly twenty nations were levying tariffs on each others' goods. American capitalists demanded and received special favors from Congress. A high protective tariff encouraged "infant industries" and raised manufacturers' profits by keeping out foreign goods. Liberal immigration laws insured a steady supply of cheap labor. The federal government Imre about a third of the cost of building the western railroads and sold public lands containing vast mineral wealth for a small proportion of their true value. (7) American institutions and attitudes. In Europe it was often difficult to change industrial methods because of continuing traditions of hand craftsmanship and the feeling that a son should follow his father's trade. But in America no such restraints existed; both laborer and industrialist felt free to abandon old techniques and try new ones. In America more than in Europe business attracted and held people of high ability and and to speed transportation and communication. Among these were the telephone, new methods of steel production, and the use of electricity as a source of light and power. (2) Vast natural resources. The immense underground wealth of the United States had scarcely been touched. The country contained in fantastic abundance the raw materials upon which industry depended, such as coal, iron, petroleum, and copper. (3) Railroad building. By 1900 the railroad mileage of the United States was greater than that of all the rest of the world. Technical improvements enabled trains to carry' bulky products long distances cheaply, thus making it possible for business people to sell their goods in a nation-wide market. (4) Abundant capital. The great profits to be obtained from manufacturing and transportation in the United States attracted investors. Much of the capital formerly invested in shipping was diverted to building factories and railroads. Billions of dollars came from abroad, especially from England. (5) A mobile labor supply. European capitalists often had difficulty' recruiting labor for new industries because workers had been Industrial America ambition. While European capitalists often retired from business when they had acquired enough money to buy their way into the upper classes, American capitalists regarded moneymaking as a laudable end in itself. They had no other ambition than to be "captains of industry." At the other end of the scale Europe was plagued with an almost hereditary class of paupers who, with little hope of ever rising from poverty, lacked initiative. In the United States, on the other hand, laborers believed that hard work would be rewarded, if not by wealth for themselves, at least by wider opportunities for their children. American law encouraged the formation of business corporations, and this form of ownership had a number of advantages over partnerships or individual proprietorships. It provided permanence of organization, so that its officers could plan far into the future. By selling bonds and stocks, a corporation could get the capital needed for its operations from the public at large, and small bits of capital could be pooled into large sums. Those with capital were attracted to corporate securities because by diversifying their investments they could spread their risks. A specialized form of corporation, the holding company, enabled capitalists to combine The lure of freedom and higher wages drew an ever-increasing number of immigrants to America from Europe. The average influx of immigrants to the United States was over a third of a million per year between 1870 and 1900. This woodcut shows John Bull, the British counterpart of Uncle Sam, trying to hold back workers wishing to go to the United States. Like most American cities. Albany. New York, was laid out in a rectangular gridiron design This layout is convenient lor builders and brings maximum profit to real estate owners, but it is monotonous and it makes every street a thoroughfare, dangerous for childron and other pedestrians. York City), and at railroad centers (Omaha and Chicago). Once established, cities grew by a self- generating process. Various facilities appeared to serve industry: banks and insurance companies, docks and warehouses. These in turn attracted more industry. Immigrants, lacking agricultural skill or money to buy a farm, could often find employment only in urban areas. The recent arrivals often preferred the big cities where there were colonies of people who spoke their native language and tried to preserve old- world customs. An even greater source of supply for the growing urban population were American rural areas, Thus not merely trotn the rocky hillsides of New Hampshire and Vermont, but even from rich lands in Iowa and Illinois, farm boys and girls, bored with life in the country, headed for the city lights to make their fortunes. "A sort of natural selection,' remarked a foreign traveler in America, "carries the more ambitious and eager spirits into the towns, for the native American dislikes the monotons and isolation of farm life with its slender prospect of wealth." Although the modem industrial city offered many people the opportunity for a higher standard of living than they hail known before, it also confronted them with a novel and often unattractive environment. There was inadequate provision for parks and playgrounds, the few open spaces too often lieing given over to dumps and to vacant lots where a scanty' growth of grass and weeds competed with cinders and tin cans. Hivers and harbors were polluted byr sewage and factory wastes, and the air was made foul by smoke from thousands of chimneys. In many ways the new environment seemed a sort of prison, cutting off people from sun, air, and natural beauty. Problems Created by Urbanization Tin.' growth ol cities created many technical and human problems. There was. for instance, a demand lor new sources ot water, since wells and brooks provided too scanty a supply ami were often polluted. New York City was the first to make a major effort to meet this problem by building the Croton Aqueduct, twenty-five miles outside the city limits. Cities became so The Emergence of Modem America between 1860 and 1896. Europeans traveling in this country were impressed by the high level of prosperity of the mass of the people. The English historian James Bryce wrote as follows about the lot of American workers: In England the lot of the labourer has been hitherto a hard one,... with the workhouse at the end of the vista; while the misery in such cities as London, Liverpool, and Glasgow is only too well known. In France there is less pauperism, but nothing can be more pinched and sordid than the life of the bulk of the peasantry.... Of Russia, with her ninety millions of peasants living in half- barbarism, there is no need to speak. Contrast any one of these countries with the United States, where the working classes are as well fed, clothed, and lodged as the lower middle classes in Europe,. . . where a good education is within reach of the poorest, where the opportunities for getting on in one way or another are so abundant that no one need fear any physical ill but disease or the result of his own intemperance. Pauperism already exists in some of the larger cities, But outside one sees nothing but comfort. The industrial revolution provided new leisure not merely for the very rich, but for the middle class and workmen as well. As machines more and more took over the work of hands, the labor time necessary for producing a shirt, a bucket, a pin, or a length of chain was reduced to a small fraction of what it had been formerly. Hours of work, although still long by the standards of the twentieth century, gradually responded to the fact that less labor time was now needed to meet human wants. As leisure time increased, new forms of amusement developed or were introduced from abroad by recent immigrants. City' dwellers needed such distraction more than country people because their jobs were usually more monotonous. Many of the immigrants, furthermore, had a greater inclination to enjoy themselves on holidays than the older stock of Americans, for many of whom Sunday was a day of self-denial. Sports and Amusements To meet the new need for diversion many turned to sports. The more wealthy played golf, croquet, and lawn tennis, imported from Great Britain. College students brought in still other British sports—rowing, track, and rugby (from which the American game of football was derived). The American game of baseball was spread all over the country by college and club teams. Starting with the Cincinnati Red Stockings in 1869, more and more teams turned professional. In 1876 the National League was organized, followed shortly by others. Boxing- previously prohibited by law, like cockfighting today—began to attract public interest and to assume respectability after John L. Sullivan won the world's heavyweight championship. The amusement which for a time outstripped all others was bicycling. After the modem safety bicycle was substituted for the dangerous "high wheeler," bicycling became a craze. There were hundreds of bicycle clubs; special trains carried cyclists into the country on Sundays; and special bicycle paths were built in parks and suburbs. There was even a demand for a bicycle path from one ocean to the other. The cities—especially the great metropolitan centers such as New York, Philadelphia. Boston, and Chicago—became centers of a much richer cultural life than had ever existed in America. In a day when the motion picture had not yet been invented, vaudeville and the theater enjoyed their period of greatest prosperity. Opera companies and symphony orchestras were founded and halls were built to house them. In 1891 Peter Ilich Tchaikovsky, the famous Russian composer, came to America and conducted one of his own works at the new Carnegie Music Hall' in New York. He wrote The Emergence of Modem America and a half billion dollars—over twice the national debt of the United States at that time. First Transcontinental Railroad, 1869 The most dramatic achievement in railroad building was the completion of the first transcontinental line. Discussion of this project began with the discovery of gold in California in 1849. During the 1850's no less than ten routes were surveyed, and the Gadsden Purchase was acquired from Mexico principally because the Gila River Valley provided the lowest route across the western plateau. Nothing was decided before the war, however, because of intense sectional rivalry, the South wanting the eastern terminal at New Orleans, the North preferring St. Louis or Chicago. In 1862, with the South temporarily out of the Union, Congress passed an act to encourage the building of a Pacific Railroad. From Omaha the Union Pacific Company was to build westward, and from Sacramento, the Central Pacific Company was to run lines eastward. The federal government lent money to those companies at the rate of $16,000, $32,000, or $48,000 per mile, according to the terrain. They also received land grants along the right of way averaging 6,400 acres per mile. Construction began in earnest shortly after the war and proceeded rapidly. The two railroads were competing to get more government money and public lands, as well as to secure a greater share of the trade of the interior. At the height of the struggle the Union Pacific builders employed 10,000 men. Crews of Irishmen working for the Union Pacific and of Chinese working for the Central Pacific sometimes laid as much as six miles of track a day. Once on a bet of $10,000, a Central Pacific crew laid ten miles of track between sunrise and sundown, an all- time world's record. "It is a literal fact that more ground was ironed in some days, by the two companies together, than the ox teams of 1849 averaged in a single day's journey." The steam shovel not yet having been invented, the digging and grading were done by men and teams. Holes for blasting had to be driven by men with sledge hammers. The Union Pacific building crews had to be protected from Indian attacks and buffalo stampedes The Central Pacific had an even more difficult time with the Sierra Nevada ranges and with snow that sometimes collected in drifts sixty feet deep. All its heavy equipment was carried from the East 19,000 miles around Cape Horn to California in a fleet of thirty ships. The two lines met at Promontory Point, Utah, and on May 10, 1869, the "wedding of the rails" took place. The whole country was able to listen as the transcontinental telegraph reported the blow of the silver sledge hammer driving the golden spike. A magnetic ball dropped from a pole on the top of the Capitol in Washington; in Chicago a seven-mile procession paraded through the streets; everywhere the air rang with the bells of churches and firehouses. The "northwest passage" from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific had at last been established. James J. HIM, Railroad Builder The first transcontinental line was followed shortly by others—the Northern Pacific; the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe; the Southern Pacific; and the Great Northern. Like other big businesses, these railroads needed at the top people of ability, imagination, and drive. The greatest of the western builders was James J. Hill (1838-1916), creator of the Great Northern. Hill was a small, short-tempered, red-bearded man of titanic energy. He foresaw that his line woidd tie together the whole northern tier of the United States from Lake Superior to Puget Sound It would carry' flour westward from the Dakotas and Minnesota for eventual shipment to Japan and China, and carry Pacific Coast lumber eastward for bams, silos, and homes in The Emergence of Modem America nightmares grazing in reality on the brown stubble in front of their sun-warped doors. White went on to say that the family's spirits revived amid the plenty of eastern Kansas and they were ready to try again. In spite of all difficulties, however, most settlers managed to conquer their physical environment. Water from deep wells enabled them to plant gardens and trees around their homes. The railroads brought lumber and brick for houses to replace sod huts, and coal to replace cornstalks or hay as fuel. The Literature of the Sod House Frontier The struggle of the farmers with the Plains produced a literature quite unlike that of the Wild West. Cowboys and miners were usually young men; their lives were adventurous; they were on the move. But homesteaders took on responsibilities difficult to shed; they often pledged themselves to a bank, invested in tools and land, and started to raise a family. When misfortune hit, they had to weather it out. It is natural to find, therefore, that the literature of the Plains was realistic, sometimes bitter. This can be seen in the stories of Hamlin Garland, who was born on a Wisconsin farm in 1860. Garland's family moved west three times during his boyhood. In books such as Main-Travelled Roads and A Son of the Middle Border, he told "a tale of toil that's never done." Although describing moments of joy such as harvest time, or of beauty, as when the spring touched the Plains, Garland refused to say that "butter was always golden and biscuits invariably light and flaky." "I will not lie," he wrote, "even to be a patriot. A proper proportion of the sweat, flies, heat, dirt, and drudgery shall go in." A principal source of settlers for the northern portion of the Great Plains was Scandinavia. So many settlers came to the wheat country that by 1890 four hundred Minnesota towns bore Scandinavian names. Letters written to relatives back home described the wonders of the new land. "Here it is not asked," wrote one, "what or who was your father, but the question is, what are you?" Another wrote of the pleasure of eating white bread every day and pork three times a week. Still another remarked that here was a country where there were no thieves or beggars. But they told of troubles too: Indian raids, prairie fires, locusts, and loneliness. Such troubles provide the subject of the greatest novel of the Great Plains, O. E. Holvaag's Giants in the Earth, written in Norwegian. It describes the heroic efforts of two people, Per and Beret Hnnsa, to establish a farm in South Dakota. They eventually triumph, but the human cost is terrible: Beret goes slowly mad, and Per dies in a blizzard. Frontier Women For women, the pioneering phase of life on the Plains often meant solitude and drudgery. "Born and scrubbed, suffered and died," is the epitaph given a woman in one of Hamlin Garland's poems. Yet the settlement of the West owed more to the endless toil of frontier women than to Indian fighters, fur traders, and prospectors. A character in Edna Ferber's novel Cfrrwrrorl pays this tribute: You can't read the history of the United States, my friends. .. without learning the great stow of those thousands of unnamed women . . . women in mud-caked boots and calico dresses and sunbonnets, crossing the prairie and the desert and the mountains enduring hardship and privation. Cood women with a terrible and rigid goodness that comes of work and self-denial. Nothing picturesque or romantic about them, I suppose . . . no, their story's never really been told. But it's there just the same. And if it's ever told straight, you'll know it's the sunbonnet and not the sombrero that's settled this country. It is not surprising that women have written some of the best accounts of Plains life, such as Cimarron and My Antonia by Willa Cather. While not minimizing the sufferings of pioneer- The Emergence of Modern America demand better pay. In 1863-64, the number of local unions rose from 79 to 270. There was also organization on a national scale, since a local union was often helpless in dealing with an industrial corporation doing business throughout the country. Difficulties Facing the Unions In spite of rapid growth during the war and afterward, labor unions faced many difficulties: (1) American labor was mobile and diverse. It was difficult to organize workmen in this country because they would not "stay hitched," but moved from job to job. Young men, who in other countries might have become labor leaders, went into business for themselves or worked up into executive positions. The inflow of immigrants, averaging over a third of a million a year between 1870 and 1900, increased the difficulties of organization. Ignorant of American wage scales and with few resources, the newcomers often accepted low pay. A Contract Labor Law, passed by Congress in 1864, allowed employers to hire foreign laborers, bring them to America, and have them work for a year to repay passage. Variety in language, religion, and customs among the immigrants made it hard to weld them into an effective organization. To discourage unionization, employers deliberately mixed nationalities. Thus a steel mill superintendent wrote: We must be careful what class of men we collect. We must steer clear of the West, where men are accustomed to infernal high wages. We must steer clear as far as we can of Englishmen who are great sticklers for high wages, small production and strikes. My experience has shown that Germans and Irish, Swedes and what I denominate "Buck- wheats"—young American country boys, judiciously mixed, make the most effective and tractable force you can find. (2) There was confusion of aims. Those who wanted to bring all workers together and promote widespread reforms were opposed by others who believed that unions should work only for the short-time benefit of workers in their particular craft or industry. A small but vocal group wanted to use the power of organized labor to overthrow the capitalist system and establish socialism (see pp. 444—445). Even more radical were anarchists who preached, "All property is theft; all government is tyr- anny," and tried to create class hatred by bornb-throwing and assassination. Although never composing more than a small fraction of the labor movement, socialists and anarchists aroused fear and dislike which were transferred to all workers' organizations. (3) Unions faced strong opposition from employers. Workers were often required to take an iron-clad oath that they would not join a union. If discharged for union activity, a worker often remained jobless, because employers combined to keep black lists of all "troublemakers." Once black-listed, a laborer could get a job only by changing residence, trade, or name. Once workers organized a plant, the employer could still fight back by a lockout (shutting the plant down) or by discharging union supporters and hiring strikebreakers (also known as "scabs"). In any strike or lockout the odds favored employers because they had the longer purse; few unions could afford to support their members through the prolonged unemployment caused by a strike. (4) Public opinion was distrustful of labor unions. Laborers formed a minority group in America, and unions were an unfamiliar type of organization. Fixing wages and hours by collective bargaining between union representatives and employers was presented as violating the right of an individual to deal personally with the employer. Occasionally public opinion condemned employers when labor disputes resulted in violence. This happened during the Homestead lockout in 1892, when the Carnegie Steel Protest Movements wages of the rest. It did not reduce either its dividends or the rents charged to workers in the town of Pullman. When a delegation protested the pay cuts, its members were fired. Most Pullman workers then struck, and Pullman locked out the rest. Pullman workers who were members of the American Railway Union called on it for help. Debs proposed that the dispute be referred to arbitration, but Pullman replied, "There is nothing to arbitrate." The American Railway Union thereupon declared a boycott, in which union members refused to work on any train which included a Pullman car. Pullman had an ally, however, in the Railway Managers Association, made up of the heads of all twenty-four railroads running into Chicago. The managers ran Pullman cars, even on trains that did not ordinarily include them. The result was that five days after the boycott began in late June 1894, 100,000 railwaymen had quit work, and railway traffic west of Chicago was almost paralyzed. Debs warned his followers not to interfere with United States mails, and appealed to them to be "orderly and law-abiding." Although a few mail trains were delayed, usually when combined with Pullman cars, there were few disturbances. Labor and the Injunction The Pullman strike was defeated by the federal government. Over the protests of the mayor of Chicago and governor of Illinois, who claimed they had matters in hand. President Cleveland sent federal troops to guard mail trains. Immediately rioting broke out as angry mobs, sympathetic to the strikers, taunted the soldiers. Members of the American Railway Union kept out of trouble, but nevertheless received the blame. Even before the troops appeared, the federal government also took judicial action. On application of the U.S. Attorney General, a federal judge issued an injunction (court order) forbidding any interference with transportation in interstate commerce and any attempt to persuade railway workers to quit work. The judge held that the strike was a conspiracy in restraint of trade and therefore a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. On refusing to obey. Debs was jailed for contempt of court. Deprived of his leadership, the Pullman strike collapsed and with it the American Railway Union. From that time on, labor unions demanded that the use of the injunction in labor disputes be abolished. Even outside labor circles there was strong feeling that putting Debs in jail was an unfair extension of judicial power. The Springfield Republican, one of the most influential newspapers in the country, said, "If Debs has been violating the law, let him be indicted, tried by a jury, and punished. Let him not be made the victim of an untenable court order and deprived of his liberty entirely within the discretion of a judge." Gains of Labor Although labor unions lost more disputes than they won, and most workers remained entirely unorganized, laborers made genuine gains during the latter nineteenth century. The deflation, which hurt the farmer, helped the worker by lowering the cost of food. Improved technology produced better and cheaper goods. As we have seen, real wages increased, even though the average work day was reduced from 12 hours to 10 hours between 1830 and 1900. Federal and state legislation reflected the growing political influence of labor. To keep imported labor from depressing wages, Congress passed the first laws restricting immigration. In 1882 Chinese laborers were excluded, and in 1885 it was forbidden to import w orkers under contract. Several states gave labor unions a new legal status by granting them the right The Emergence of Modern America right to vote in school board elections; four— Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, and Idaho—had granted them full voting rights. Grappling with New Problems: Jacob A. Riis and Jane Addams The most all-pervasive and difficult problems to be faced were not those inherited from earlier periods, but those connected with industrialism and urbanization. The suggested solutions were as various as the problems. Some people looked back to an earlier morality for answers. Thus some pious folk sought to enforce the Puritan Sabbath as a means of regenerating the city. As a result restaurants and amusement places were closed, and there were even efforts to forbid the running of trains and streetcars. The railway strike of 1877 and the Haymarket riot of 1886 greatly alarmed those who feared immigrants carrying dangerous foreign "isms." A few politicians, notably Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts, professed to see a menace to America in the "new immigration" from southern and eastern Europe and advocated legislation that would discriminate against "alien races." A short-lived national organization, the American Protective Association, which had much the same philosophy as the Know Nothings of the 1850's, also sought to restrict immigration, and to bar Catholics from office as well. Such negative and defensive reactions did not grapple with the realities of life in factories, shops, and slums. One of those who did face these realities was Jacob A. Riis, a Danish- American police reporter for New York newspapers. In the course of his work, Riis had seen again and again the connection between slums and human degradation. In 1890 he focused public attention on the slum evil in a bestselling book. How the Other Half Lives. By appealing to public conscience, Riis secured legislation that reduced the worst slum conditions, along with other measures that improved the lives of city dwellers, such as playgrounds for schools. Among his close friends was a rising young Republican politician, Theodore Roosevelt, whom he "educated" by taking him into tenements, sweatshops, and jails. In the year before How the Other Half Lives was published, Jane Addams founded Hull House, the most famous American settlement house, in a Chicago slum. Inspired by a passionate desire to put her Christian faith to work, and modeling her endeavor on Toynbee Hall, a settlement house in England, Jane Addams was determined to improve the life of the "other half." Hull House soon carried on activities as various as cooking classes, an art gallery, a gymnasium, hot lunches for factory workers, and classes in English. Above all, it was interested in children, on the principle that "a fence at the top of a precipice is better than an ambulance at the bottom." Jane Addams soon surrounded herself with young |>eople who were glad to enlist in a war against human suffering. (See biographical sketch, p. 539) Religious conviction and desire to serve humanity were also the motivating forces lie- hind the foundation of other settlement houses, such as the Henry Street Settlement in New York City, the Santa Maria Institute in Cincinnati, and South End House in Boston. In addition to their immediate services to the people in their neighborhoods, the settlement houses were schools where hundreds of men and women learned the conditions of life among the poor and then went into politics to promote reform legislation, either as lobbyists or as officeholders. "Graduates" of Hull House, for instance, were instrumental in securing the first playgrounds and public baths in Chicago, better garbage collection, and the first Illinois factory inspection law. Trained in a New York settlement house, Frances Perkins embarked on a political The Emergence of Modem America adapted them for modem use. The firm of McKim, Mead, and White used Italian Renaissance style in designing the Boston Public Li- brary'. Henry Richardson adapted Romanescjue style for churches, libraries, warehouses, and department stores. The Transportation Building at the Chicago Exposition, designed by Louis Sullivan, did not imitate earlier styles. Sullivan preached a new concept: "Form follows func- tion." He meant that the architect should get rid of tradition and create buildings whose design should reveal their purposes and methods of construction. Sullivan's influence, both direct and later through the work of his famous pupil Frank Lloyd Wright, was world-wide. The finest example of a structure whose form expressed its function was the Brooklyn Bridge, completed in 1883, some sixteen years after it was begun. Hung from great steel cables with a span half again as great as that of any previous bridge, it was designed and constructed by two German-Americans, John A. Roebling and his son Washington Augustus Roebling. The Roeblings, one of whom was killed on the job and the other crippled, succeeded in their intention of making their bridge "a great work of art," and "a great example of advanced ... engineering" which should "forever testify to the energy, enterprise, and wealth" of New York City. Socialism: Karl Marx and Edward Bellamy Wherever industrialism appeared, it drove some people toward extreme solutions of the problems it created—especially toward socialism. Something seemed wrong with a system which produced both idle rich living in palaces and unemployed paupers living in slums. Some were impelled toward socialism by unjust treatment: Eugene V. Debs, for instance, became a lifelong convert after his imprisonment in a Woodstock, 111., jail during the Pullman strike. There are many types of socialism, but those with the most impact on the modem world stem from the writings of Karl Marx, especially The Communist Manifesto (1847), and Capital (1867-1895). Marx, who wrote with force and buttressed his opinions with great learning, predicted that capitalism was doomed. Fewer and fewer capitalists, he said, would monopolize all wealth, while the mass of the people would be pushed into the ranks of the proletariat (peo- ple without prop- erty). Eventually the proletarians, preferring the risk of death at the barricades in violent revolution to slow starvation in the factories and slums, would rise and overthrow their masters. History, said Marx, had seen continuous class struggles, but that between industrial workers and capitalists would be the last. When the workers won, they w'ould establish a classless society which would continue happily ever after. Marx called on proletarians everywhere to join his crusade: "Workers of the world, unite!" Marxian socialism enlisted millions of work- QUESTION • Marxian Communists have failed to gain control of highly industrialized countries, which Marx expected would be the first to fall, and yet they have succeeded in slightly industrialized countries such as Russia and China. Can you find an explanation? ers in the industrial countries of Europe. In America, however, it gained only a small following, mostly among immigrant groups in big cities. Although these people talked about "the revolution" as though it were just around the corner, and published a number of newspapers with titles like The Volcano, they were not much of a threat to American society. Marxian socialism appeals less to the poor themselves than (o intellectuals who are alienated for some reason or another from the society in which they live and who are looking for a new creed and cause. The Republican Party The Republican party had come into power in 1861 with the support of eastern business people and western farmers. Each group had its own demands, but they were united in opposition to the spread of slavery. Not only was slavery abolished as a result of the Civil War, but legislation passed during the war fulfilled eastern demands for a high tariff and stronger banks, as well as western demands for free land and federal aid to railroads. Thus the Republicans enjoyed the support of several groups owing it gratitude: freed slaves, manufacturers, officers and stockholders of national banks, homesteaders, owners of western railroads. In addition, the Republicans could count on the support of the powerful organization of Union veterans called the Grand Army of the Republic (GAR for short). The Republicans had a patron saint in Abraham Lincoln, whose birthday they honored by banquets and oratory. Above all, they had immense prestige as the party that won the Civil War. "The party that saved the nation must rule it," they proclaimed. This explains why Republicans kept alive war hatreds by "waving the bloody shirt." It would not be fair, however, to dismiss the Republican party as nothing but a bundle of interest groups attempting to win elections by enmities better forgotten. Its strength came from genuine devotion to the idea of the United States as a nation rather than as a federation of states. A number of its members were inspired by the idealism that characterized the party in its early years; in 1872 and again in 1884, this reform element "bolted" to the Democrats in protest against political corruption. The great problem of the Republican party was to keep together its eastern wing, dominated by bankers and industrialists, and its "grass roots" western wing, dominated by farmers. The two groups were likely to break into open warfare over such issues as greenbacks, free silver, tariffs, and banking. Usually, however, they managed to maintain an uneasy alliance for the purpose of winning elections. In general, the Middle West provided the presidential candidates, while the East provided the party funds. The Democratic Party The Democrats were so used to being out of office, according to "Mr. Dooley " that when writing their platform they forgot how to say "we commend," but automatically began to "denounce and deplore." The party strength centered in an alliance, formed in Jefferson's day, between Southerners and northern city machines, such as Tammany Hall. Roth groups could "deliver the vote." From the end of Radical reconstruction until well into the twentieth century, the Solid South never wavered in its allegiance to the Democrats; New York City was almost as consistent. The Democrats had allies among western farmers, especially when prices were low, and among certain classes of business people, such as international bankers and importers who favored a lower tariff. They also attracted those doing municipal business, such as contractors and owners of street railways. The Democratic party had two patron saints —Jefferson and Jackson. The Democrats claimed to be more concerned with the common man than their opponents, and tended to enlist more support from recent immigrants. However, the party labored under the handicap that wiped out the Federalists after the War of 1812: the charge of disloyalty. Although during the Civil Parties and Politics War most northern Democrats had supported the Union, the party had included a few "Cop- perheads." It naturally became Democratic strategy to urge that war hatreds be forgotten. The Democratic party was perhaps more difficult to hold together than the Republican. The northern and southern wings were united in little save opposition to the Republicans. There was little in common between eastern city machines and southern farmers. At the time of the Hayes-Tilden election, conservative southern Democrats abandoned their candidate and arranged with Republican leaders the Compromise of 1877 (see pp. 373-374). Pressure Groups and Lobbies Although the Republican party held the upper hand, the Democrats were seldom far out of the running. In four of the eight presidential elections between 1868 and 1896, the difference in popular vote was less than 1 per cent of the total ballot. Hard times tend to hurt the party in power, and when there was a depression, Republican strength dropped. The Panic of 1873 helped to produce a "tidal wave" in the mid-term election of 1874, in which the Democrats wiped out a two-thirds Republican majority. With the major parties so evenly divided, small changes in voting strength might decide elections. This opened the way for well-organ- ized pressure groups. Lobbyists exerted such pressure that they were called "the third House of Congress." The great corporations regularly contributed to campaign funds, often to those of both parties, regarding such payments as "insurance" against unfavorable legislation. But business groups were not always supreme. Pressure from southern and western inflationists pushed the Bland-Allison Act through Congress in spite of opposition from bankers and bondholders (see p. 431). Similarly the strength of organized labor was seen in immigration restriction acts, passed over the opposition of shipping companies and employers. On the whole, the different interests within each party were so evenly balanced that they canceled each other out. 1877-1893 After the Reconstruction period came to an end, as a recent historian remarks, the federal government was "the epitome of lethargy. It was astonishingly idle." While the country was agitated over such matters as railroad abuses, labor conflicts, and the growth of monopoly, the two major parties spent their time fighting sham battles over petty and often irrelevant issues. There were several reasons for this divorce between politics and reality. One was the remarkably even division of party strength; seldom was one party in control of the presidency and both houses of Congress. The power of the presidency itself was at a low ebb, so there was little opportunity for strong executive leadership. In Congress itself leadership was fragmented among committee chairmen. But perhaps the most important reason for inaction was the prevailing laissez faire philosophy. The federal government did not act because it was supposed to leave things alone. The administration of President Rutherford B. Hayes (1877-1881) saw a slight but definite rise in both the tone of politics and the power of the presidency. Hayes put Carl Schurz, a noted reformer, in charge of the Department of the Interior, which heretofore had been a happy hunting ground for patronage. He also forbade the practice of "shaking down" officeholders for campaign contributions. Hayes defied congressional leaders in making major appointments and in refusing to allow Congress to use "riders" (irrelevant amendments) as a means of coercing him into accepting legislation Parties and Politics party. The major planks—concerning land, transportation, money, and credit—all reflected the interests of the farmer. Tire demands of organized labor, such as those for an 8-hour day on government contracts and for immigration restriction, were given a subordinate position. Not included in the platform proper, they were placed among a miscellaneous list of resolutions entitled "Expression of Sentiments." (See pp. 805-806 for text of Omaha platform.) The Omaha platform seems less radical in perspective than it did at the time. It approached socialism only in proposing that the government take over railroad and telegraph lines, both natural monopolies; for such action the Erie and other canals provided an American precedent. The Populists proposed not to overthrow the capitalist system, but simply to change the rules. They aimed to achieve their ends not through revolution, but through the orderly process of free elections. The Populist platform reveals an important function of American third parties—to bring to public attention measures that the major parties later adopt as their own. The majority of the Populist demands were later put into effect through either state or federal legislation. The Populists entered the campaign of 1892 with religious fervor. They adapted revival meeting hymns as party songs. Monster rallies were addressed not only by men, but also by 'women with skins tanned to parchment by the hot winds, with bony bands of toil and clad in faded calico." One of these orators, Mrs. Mary E. Lease, "the Kansas Cassandra," achieved fame by urging farmers to "raise less com and more Hell." The balloting revealed the sectional character of the People's party. All its 22 electoral votes came from states lying west of the Missouri River. In the South, sympathy with Populist aims was widespread, but there was fear that the new party might divide the Democratic vote and let the Republicans back into power. Southern sympathizers therefore became "Popocrats"—Democrats with Populist principles. Continuing Tide of Immigration Each symbol — 500.000 Immigrants. Tire ease of the Japanese victory laused fear in America and Europe that the White race" would be overwhelmed by the Bdlow race"; this notion of the "yellow peril" QUESTION • Which of these purposes were accomplished for the time being? Which permanently? was played up by the yellow press. On the Pacific Coast, feeling began to rise against Japanese immigration, resulting in discrimination against Japanese children in the public schools. Japan regarded this as an insult. More significant than the tide of ill will, which subsided, was the fact that the recent war altered the balance of power in the Orient. Now it was no longer Russian expansion that was most to be feared, but Japanese. Roosevelt himself feared that there was serious danger of war. In a rather complicated series of maneuvers, Roosevelt attempted at the same time to soothe Japanese anger, satisfy Japanese ambition, save the Philippines from Japanese aggression, and show the Japanese that he was not afraid of them. Although the federal government had no power to force a city or state to change its education laws, the President persuaded the Californians to stop discriminating against Japanese school children. Japan in turn agreed to halt the emigration of laborers to America. This compromise, arranged in 1907 and 190S, was known as the Centlemen's Agreement. Regarding the balance of power in the Far East, Roosevelt attempted to avert danger of Japanese expansion toward the Philippines by agreeing to recognize the predominant position of Japan in Korea and Manchuria. At least this is what seems to be the substance of two rather vaguely worded executive agreements, the Taft- Katsura "agreed memorandum" of 1905, and the Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908. At the same time, in a truly Rooseveltian gesture, the President attempted to impress Japan with American naval power by sending an American fleet to Tokyo during its journey around the world in 1908. New Horizons persisted. It went on to attempt to organize those outside the protection of existing labor unions: migrants, immigrants, and unskilled workers. Wherever the IWW appeared, there were strikes, and often violence, which were repaid in kind by deputy sheriffs, company police, and private vigilante groups. Yet although the "Wobblies," as they were called, made headlines and actually won a few strikes, their membership never began to approach that of the non-revolutionary unions. The movement lost ground when its leaders opposed American participation in World War 1 and disintegrated during the "red scare" that followed the war. Eventually any wave of popular emotion subsides; so it was with progressivism. Muckraking became a journalistic formula, and the public grew tired of scandals. Many of the democratic reforms did not work out as planned, partly because the advocates of direct democracy had too optimistic a faith in the publics continuing interest in politics. Too frequent elections promoted voter indifference. Sometimes as few as 10 per cent of the eligible voters took part in primary elections. In any case, primary elections were apt to weaken party discipline and responsibility by taking the selection of candidates out of the control of the party organization. The new machinery for centralizing control of municipal government was no insurance against boss rule. After "throwing the rascals out" and setting up a commission or city-manager plan, the citizens of a town often lost interest and let the rascals back into power again. Public ownership of public utilities sometimes proved inefficient, as well as a fruitful source of patronage and graft. Furthermore, the benefits of progressivism were unequally distributed. The middle class leaders of the movement feared labor unions scarcely less than trusts, and manufacturers organized effectively to prevent unionization, often with the active cooperation of local courts and police. The principal advance of labor during this period was among tire minority of skilled workers. The real wages of unskilled workers actually dropped, since it was a period when the prices they paid for commodities increased more rapidly than their rates of pay. Treatment of the "New Immigrants" A factor that depressed the wage scale was a great flood of immigrants, averaging a million a year, the majority from southern and eastern Europe. This "new immigration" caused alarm not merely among native laborers, who saw it as a threat to their livelihood, but among those who feared them simply as aliens. The new immigrants were more strange to established American custom than were the "old immigrants" from northern and western Europe, and they had to face discrimination, both by law and by custom. This even reached such ridiculous lengths as the passage of state legislation forbidding the teaching of foreign languages in schools. Pressure from labor union leaders and organizations such as an Immigration Restriction League induced Congress in 1897, 1913, and 1915 to pass laws requiring a literacy test of immigrants. Presidents Cleveland, Taft, and Wilson vetoed all three, always on the ground that illiteracy was a reflection of lack of opportunity rather than lack of ability. Finally, however, such a law was passed over President Wilson's veto in 1917. Where do immigrants come from today? Are they subjected to similar discrimination? The Progressive Movement Frustration for the Black The most conspicuous failure of progressism was in regard to the Negro. Since the close of Radical Reconstruction in 1877, the place of the Negro in the South had evolved into a pattern of settled inferiority—in other words, of "white supremacy." This development did not take place at once. During the 1880's, visitors to the South from the North and from Europe were impressed by the way blacks and wliites mingled in public facilities such as streetcars, theaters, and soda fountains. A Negro newspaperman, returning from the North to his birthplace in South Carolina in 1385, found less discrimination in traveling and eating arrangements than in New England. The conservative whites, often former planters, who dominated southern politics for a time were quite ready to give Negroes a dignified, although subordinate, place in southern life. In return, the Negroes generally voted for the "quality folk" in elections. But in the decades before and after 1900, there were successful efforts, varying in degree from state to state, to segregate Negroes both by law and by custom and to deprive them of political rights. Segregation extended to "virtually all forms of public transportation, to sports and recreations, to hospitals, orphanages, prisons, and asylums, and ultimately to funeral homes, morgues, and Jane Addams, Social Reformer While on vacation in Madrid in the spring of 1888, a frail, small, well-to-do young American woman suddenly hit on a strange plan. Taking her Inspiration from Toynbee House, a social settlement house in the East End of London, she decided that she would go to a large city, find a place in the middle of the poorest district, and begin to live as a neighbor and friend to the very poor. By doing this, Jane Addams hoped to find a way to broaden the applications of democracy She believed that to limit the concept of democracy to the eighteenth-century Idea of political equality would not answer the growing needs of late nineteenth-century industrial America. Returning to the United States, she founded Hull-House, on South Halsted Street in the immigrant section of Chicago. There she blazed a trail of social responsibility to the community. Out of the experiences of Hull-House came the first juvenile court in the United States, the first public playground in Chicago, pensions for mothers, the start of industrial medicine, and the union label. Jane Addams' interests extended far beyond Hull-House to gaining suffrage for women, ending child labor, and establishing collective bargaining in labor disputes. She helped found the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People. From 1914 on, she was prominent in the movement to end war, winning the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1931. Perhaps her greatest achievement was the (act that thousands of women were moved by her example of moral leadership lo enter actively into the life of the community. Three years before her death In 1935, she summed up her goals: "To marshal the moral forces capable of breaking what must be broken and building what must be built; to reconstruct our social reiationships through a regeneration of the heart; to repair a world shattered by #ar and sodden self-seeking; to establish moral control over a mass of mechanical achievements." Crusade and Disillusion as well as in action." But people inevitably took sides. Many of the eight million Americans of German descent supported their former fatherland. Many Irish-Americans, motivated by traditional hatred for Britain, also favored the Central Powers. In general, however, American opinion was on the side of the Allies. This stemmed partly from a sense of common heritage with Great Britain. There was also strong sentiment for France, reflected in the lines: Forget us, Lord, if we forget The sacred sword of Lafayette. Even stronger than sentiment for either Britain or France was that against Germany. This feeling had been stimulated by various incidents, by the sabre-rattling statements of Kaiser William II, and by a movement known as Pan- Germanism. The Pan-Germans preached that the Germans were to dominate the world; they glorified war. The vague anti-German sentiment that existed in America even before the war was crystallized by Germany's unprovoked invasion of Belgium in August 1914, and by the harsh treatment of the Belgians after that event. Partiality for the Allies was strengthened by propaganda. Both sides used it, but German propaganda was clumsy and unconvincing, while that of the British was extremely skillful, especially in accusing the Germans of wholesale atrocities in Belgium. Violations of American Neutral Rights In the early years of World War I, as in the period before the War of 1812, the United States had the largest share of neutral trade and suffered serious violations of its neutral rights. The British were the first to break established international law as they clamped a tight blockade on the Central Powers. They planted mines in the North Sea, forced American ships into English ports for inspection, limited trade with neutral countries such as Denmark, opened American mail, and put food on the list of contraband materials not to be exported to Germany. The British blockade was so effective that trade between the United States and the Central Powers shrank to less than 1 per cent of its prewar level. Meanwhile exports to the Allies nearly quadrupled. For their very survival the Allies needed American war materials and food. The prosperity of the United States in turn came to depend on war orders. The economic tie with the Allies became even closer when American citizens bought over two billion dollars' worth of French and British bonds. Serious as British violations of American neutral rights were, they were less maddening than those of Germany. To meet the challenge of the British blockade and to starve Britain into submission, the Germans relied on a new weapon, the ocean-going submarine. The so- callcd "U-boats" were deadly when they attacked without warning, but they broke long- established rules of warfare which provided that unarmed ships should not be sunk without providing for the safety of passengers and crews. In the years 1914-1917, approximately 200 Americans lost their lives on Allied ships torpedoed by U-boats. "Waging Neutrality" In meeting violations of our neutral rights, Wilson took much the same position as had Jefferson during the Napoleonic wars. Like Jefferson, he detested war, yet was not a pacifist He attempted both to avoid hostilities and to "wage neutrality" by insisting on American rights. During the early months of the war, most of his protests were directed against England. These were not particularly effective, partly because W'alter H. Page, the American ambassador in London, was strongly pro-British, as were some of Wilson's closest advisers, and partly because submarine warfare soon created tension with Germany. The First World War Financing the War Tiie World War was costly beyond all expectation. By 1919 the federal government had spent about 33 billion dollars, of which 10 billion went to the Allies as loans. About a third of the money was raised by taxation, the rest by borrowing. The income tax was increased to a basic 12 per cent on incomes of $4,000 or more, with rates running up to 77 per cent on incomes over $1,000,000. Heavier burdens on corporations included an "excess profits" tax, designed to return war profits to the government. Excise duties were levied on items as varied as theatre tickets, diewing gum, and phonograph records. To borrow over twenty billion dollars, the government sold four issues of Liberty Bonds, plus a postwar issue of Victory Bonds, direct to die people. Bonds were issued in denominations is low as $25, with War Savings Stamps for as Mr as 10c. Through posters, rallies, volunteer sab people, "Liberty Loan sermons," and persua- nm by employers, the purchase of bonds was made a test of patriotism. Even children were | enlisted and urged to put their pennies iri War Savings Stamps. Twenty-one million people, wore than a fifth of the nation's population, subscribed to the Fourth Liberty Loan. Control of Opinion Since so much depended on voluntary civil- iin cooperation, the government undertook to VIT the war. A Committee on Public Infor- Ination was set up under George Creel, who Kscribed his job as "the world's greatest adven- lltrt in advertising." Creel mobilized advertising people, commercial artists, authors, songwriters, 5, orators, and motion picture companies, ns of pamphlets explained such matters the causes of the war and American war l The effect of this flood of propaganda to reinforce Wilson's idea that the war was tcrusadc. While this probably heightened the lit effort, it also helped to produce the very intolerance that Wilson dreaded. Congress passed the Espionage and Sedition Acts, designed to prevent spying and disloyalty. These were so severe that they silenced opposition to the war. The Postmaster General was given authority to ban newspapers, magazines, and pamphlets from the mails at his discretion. Under these laws hundreds of people were imprisoned, sometimes even for opinions expressed in private conversations. People were even jailed for criticizing the Red Cross or the YMCA. Although they were enforced with unnecessary vigor, the Supreme Court upheld the principle of the Espionage and Sedition Acts in a decision written by Justice Holmes. "When a nation is at war," said Holmes, "many things that might be said in time of peace are such a hindrance to the effort that their utterance will not be endured...Holmes refused, however, to support punishment when there was no "clear and present danger" of hurting the United States, or when the accused were apparently being jailed for unpopular political beliefs. An unhappy result of enthusiasm for the war was persecution of Americans of Cerman ancestry. Wilson's insistence that we were "the sincere friends of the German people" could not stand against posters displaying Germans as bloody-handed "Huns." Anti-German feeling went to such ridiculous lengths as banning the teaching of the German language in schools and abandoning public performance of music by Beethoven, Schubert, and Wagner. 'Hiere were super-patriots who even insisted that sauerkraut should be called This in turn gave rise to the charge that they were resistant to "Americanization." Americans of older stock resented the new immigrants' increasing political power, which was expressed through the political machines of the big cities. They feared even more that the newcomers would overthrow traditional values. Conservative labor unions disliked the new immigrants because they threatened to lower wage scales. Employers, who had previously favored unrestricted immigration as a means of hiring cheap labor, now came to fear that the new immigrants brought with them the seeds of revolution. Crusade and Disillusion During and after World War f, feeling against "hyphenated-Americans" was stimulated by the anti-German hysteria, by the "red scare," and by a sinister "native American" organization, the Ku Klux Klan. When immigrants, to escape the hardships that the postwar European situation imposed on them, started to pour into the United States, Congress took quick action. In 1920 Woodrow Wilson vetoed a bill to restrict immigration, but in 1921 Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act, which cut the number admitted from any country in a single year to 3 per cent of the number of that nationality residing in the United States in 1910. Three years later the Immigration Quota Law made restriction a permanent policy. This law of 1921 temporarily reduced the quota still further, setting it at 2 per cent of those resident in this country in 1890. It also provided that after 1927 the total number of immigrants admitted to the United States per year was to be 150,000, their nationalities apportioned on the basis of the census of 1920. This meant that over 85 per cent were to be admitted from northern and western Europe. The blatant racialism behind the law was further revealed when immigrants from Asia and Africa were either assigned very small quotas or barred entirely. A most unfortunate feature of the bill was total exclusion of Japanese immigration, even though the Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907-1908 had heen faithfully observed. Secretary of State Hughes wrote that Japanese exclusion undid all the good accomplished by the Washington Conference. The Japanese regarded the law as a national insult and the day it went into effect was a day of public mourning and humiliation. Tire incident discredited moderate Japanese politicians who sought cooperation with the United States and advanced the cause of reactionary militarists who were planning to assassinate their way to power and to embark on a path of conquest. Death of President Harding Those who had arranged Ilardings nomination in 1920 neither expected nor desired him to be a strong President. He fulfilled their expectations. With his massive head and fine presence, he "looked like a President," and he genuinely wanted to do well. He lacked, however, sufficient knowledge, intellectual discipline, or will power to direct policies effectively. Had he carried out his expressed intention of surrounding himself with the "best minds," he might still have avoided failure. Some appointments were commendable, such as that of former President Taft as Chief Justice and future President Hoover as Secretary of Commerce. But other jobs went to incompetent or dishonest personal friends. Corruption was more widespread and on an even larger scale than under Grant. The head of the Veterans Bureau, for instance, arranged fraudulent contracts that cost the taxpayers an estimated 200 million dollars. The secretary of the interior eventually went to prison for secretly leasing to private interests oil lands reserved for the navy at Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming, in return for bribes totaling over $300,000. When Harding began to leam what was going on, he complained privately that he had been betrayed. In the summer of 1923 he suddenly died in San Francisco, on his return from a trip to Alaska. Calvin Cootidge: Conservative When awakened to hear that Harding's death had made him President, Vice-President Coolidge was at his boyhood home in Vermont. He took the oath of office, administered by his father, in the flickering light of a kerosene lamp. This homely scene typified the relation of the new President to his time. Coolidge had many of the virtues associated with rural, small- town America. He was intensely conservative, cautious, given to few words. "I have not been Normalcy hurt,'- he once remarked, "by what 1 have not said." In occasional public speeches and magazine articles he preached the old-fashioned virtues of honesty, thrift, and hard work. His philosophy of government was simple: economy and laissez-faire. To take as little action as possible was with Coolidge almost a principle of life; he once said, "Four-fifths of all our troubles in this life woidd disappear if we would only sit down and keep still." He is said to have been the only President who slept ten hours every night and took a nap in the afternoon. The 1924 Campaign By 1924 the scandals of the Harding administration had been brought to light, thus presenting the Democratic party with a ready- made issue in the presidential campaign. But the Democrats' chances for victory were thrown away at its national convention. Ever since Reconstruction days, the strength of the Democrats had rested on an alliance between agri- I cultural interests of the South and the West and city machines of the North and the East. In 1924 the two groups split, partly over Prohibition, which the rural regions favored and I the cities opposed, and even more over the I Ku Klux Klan. This secret society, which took I its name and mumbo-jumbo ritual from the I southern organization of Heconstruction times, I resembled the Know-Nothings of the 1800's in I that it was not only designed to intimidate I the blacks, but was also the enemy of the | Catholics, Jews, immigrants, and "foreign ideas" !such as the League of Nations. In carrying out their aims, Klansmen were willing to use terror and violence. By the mid-1920's they had become a major force in politics, mostly in the South and the Middle West, but also in other states including Maine and Oregon. At the 192*1 Democratic Convention, Bryan made his last great political move by supporting a resolution to denounce the Klan as un- American. The motion was defeated by a single vote after angry debate. In the balloting for the presidential nominee, William G. McAdoo of California, generally supported by the West and South, opposed Governor Alfred E. Smith of New York, a lloman Catholic, whose following came mostly from urban areas of the East. A deadlock between the two candidates lasted so long that the cowboy-humorist Will Hogers suggested that the eventual nominee might be born in the convention. By the time a compromise candidate, John W. Davis of West Virginia, was nominated on the 103rd ballot, the Democrats had lost all chance of winning the election. An unusual aspect of the 1924 election was the attempt by Senator La Follctte of Wisconsin to start a new Progressive party. Like the Populists, the new organization was an attempt to form a fanner-labor alliance. The Progressive platfonn favored such measures as government ownership of water power, abolition of business monopolies, protection of the right of workers to form unions, and higher taxes on inheritances. Its foreign policy was isolationist. The Republicans campaigned on the slogan "Keep cool with Coolidge"; the way to keep business thriving, they said, was not to "rock the boat" but to keep in power the party that favored business. This strategy was successful. In an election that attracted only half the eligible voters to the polls, Coolidge won easily. The Democrats carried only the states of the former Confederacy, and the Progressives carried only La Follette's own state. During the 1920's the United States went almost dizzy with prosperity. New industries appeared overnight; the production of goods rose to unprecedented heights; former luxuries Normalcy 585 tries. In certain "sick industries," such as textiles and coal mining, wages actually declined. Blacks in the South were still mostly confined to poorly paid agricultural work. The unprecedented demand for new sources of labor during World War 1 started a mass migration of blacks from the South to northern and western cities, which continued during the 1920's, partially stimulated by the decline of immigration. They found greater opportunity, to be sure, but they were usually able to obtain only unskilled or menial jobs, and most trade unions denied diem membership. The new processes of manufacture caused constant teclinological unemployment. Although people replaced by machines usually found jobs elsewhere, the transition was sometimes difficult. Not only were they often forced to leave home to find employment, but they also frequently lost the benefit of long training in a particular skill. An extreme example of the latter situation was unemployment among musicians caused by the introduction of juke boxes and sound films. Although the assembly line lowered immensely the costs of production, many laborers could not stand the monotony Electrical Genius—Charles Steinmetz In 1893 the General Electric Company bought the small company which Rudolf Eickemeyer had set up to carry out electrical experiments. They acquired some equipment and a few patents, but the prize they were after was Charles Steinmetz. Steinmetz had emigrated from Germany in 1889, fleeing German officials by an editorial he had written advocating socialism. A hunchback from birth, frail, sickly, and threadbare, he knew no English. He would have been denied aomission to the United States as a pauper if a Danish friend, a fellow immigrant, bad not lent him money and agreed to sponsor him. His first American employer was Eickemeyer. to whom Steinmetz developed a strong loyalty. He gained recognition in electrical science with his work on tie law of hysteresis, which governs the loss of power by alternating magnetism. General Electric offered him a job with an excellent salary and superb research facilities. But Steinmetz would not leave Eickemeyer while the latter could use him. He did join General Electric in 1893 and, as the "Electrical Genius of GE," made contributions to science and science engineering which sped the nation into an Age of Electricity. More than two hundred patents flowed from his work, which included the study, explanation, and harnessing of alternating current. Wore Sleinmetz, it had been impossible to transmit electricity more than 3 miles without using multiple generators. With all this, he remained a Socialist. In 1916 he published America and the Ww Epoch, advocating government ownership, but private management, of in- tetry In 1922 he even ran for the office of state engineer of New York on the Socialist ticket. He was decisively defeated; America would permit him to be a Socialist but would not encourage him by electing him to office. Chapter 25 Crash The United States is the only nation that ever drove to the poorhouse in an automobile. After Coolidge had ruled himself out of the presidential race by a characteristically brief pronouncement, "I do not choose to run in 1928," the way was cleared for the choice of Herbert Hoover as Republican nominee. Previously known as a practical humanitarian. Hoover had now captured the imagination of the country as an "engineer in politics." While Secretary of Commerce under Harding and Coolidge, he used the influence and facilities of the federal government to promote better business practices and eliminate waste. In the interest of efficiency he encouraged standardization of everything from the threading of nuts and bolts to accounting methods. He promoted research in fields as diverse as fish propagation and automobile accidents. He favored the formation of "trade associations" composed of all the companies in a single business and persuaded them to reduce the need for government regulation by drawing up voluntary "codes" of "fair trade." These agreements outlawed practices such as misbranding and selling at a loss to force a competitor out of business. To oppose Hoover, the Democrats nominated one of the most competent and colorful figures in public life, Alfred E. Smith. His nomination had been blocked by the influence of the Ku Klux Klan in 1924 because he was a Roman Catholic and the grandson of immigrants, but in the intervening four years the Klan had declined as people reacted against its lawless methods and vicious intolerance. Four times governor of New York, Smith had been brilliantly successful both in promoting social legislation and in improving the efficiency of state government. The only issue of consequence in the election was Prohibition. Both candidates promised to enforce it, but Smith urged that at the very least the Volstead Act be amended to permit individual states to sell light wines and beer. Hoover supported Prohibition in rather guarded terms, calling it "a great social ant^economic experiment, noble in motive and far-reaching in purpose." An unpleasant development during the electioneering was a smear campaign against Smith because of his religion. Wild tales circulated that Catholics had surrounded Washington with alleged church sites that were really gun emplacements and that the Pope would move to the American capital if Smith were elected. Although Hoover publicly deplored The political oppression in Europe in the 1920's and 1930's forced many scientists and artists to fiee to the United States. A representative of this group who enriched American life was Arturo Toscanini. "II Maestro," who led the New York Philharmonic Orchestra. Its Sunday afternoon concerts brought classical music to millions of radio listeners. veloped recreation areas. In several industrial states there were "little New Deals"—programs of legislation designed to improve labor standards, control corporations, and extend social services. The grejt strain on local government caused by the depression encouraged municipal reform. The 1930's saw a great expansion of the dty-manager plan (see p. 531), which attempted to put local government into the hands of nonpolitical experts. New York City's vigorous little mayor, Fiorello H. LaCuardia, showed what could be done to free city government from corruption. Robert Moses, LaGuardia's park commissioner, made New York a better place to live in by building playgrounds, improving parks, and cleaning polluted waters. The prolonged depression apparently did not impede technological advance. During the 1930's commercial aviation came of age. By 1940, air lines were carrying millions of travelers and had extended their services to Europe and the Far East. Industrial laboratories continued to produce new wonders. The Du Pont Corporation easily weathered the depression by manufacturing two new materials—cellophane. which answered the need for a cheap, transparent, nonporous wrapping material; and nylon, a fabric that soon displaced silk. Amusements, the Arts In the field of amusement, the 1930's saw the universal introduction of the sound picture. Although Hollywood often presented a distorted or unreal picture of American life, there were more film plays of real merit than ever before. As a result of the inspired imagination of Walt Disney, the animated cartoon created a new world of fantasy, peopled with figures who gained world-wide affection—Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, and Pluto. The motion picture also gained as a means of education. Every month The March of Time produced a film presenting in dramatic form some important modem problem or development. The depression brought only a temporary halt to the expansion of radio, and by 1940 possession of radio sets was almost universal. This was one explanation of Roosevelt's success in winning support of the electorate when most of the press was against him. Although many radio broadcasts were designed for the lowest com- The Second World War Since one of the major elements in production is keeping labor on the job, a National War Labor Board was set up, with powers similar to those of the War Labor Board of 1917. The work of the agency was made easier by the fact that after Pearl Harbor both the CIO and the AFL made a no-strike pledge. Although there were numerous small wildcat (unauthor- ized ) strikes, and two major strikes of the coal workers, the no-strike pledge was on the whole well kept. Work stoppages amounted to a small fraction of one per cent of working time. In June 1941, Boosevelt reorganized the scientific research program by creating the Office of Scientific Research under the direction of Vannevar Bush. This organization had almost as much to do with winning the war as the army, navy, or air force. It developed radar- controlled artillery, more accurate bornb sights, a proximity fuse that immensely increased the effectiveness of antiaircraft fire, and the bazooka, with which infantrymen could knock out tanks. It helped to make jungles habitable by developing insect-destroying DDT, and to save lives through the use of penicillin and blood plasma. The most dramatic and fateful achievement of all was the harnessing of nuclear energy for military purposes. Attempts to Control Inflation The expansion of war industries caused a corresponding increase in employment. Individual take-home pay also increased, because the work week was longer and workers received time-and-a-half pay for hours worked overtime. Thus more people had more to spend. At the same time the shift of industries to war production reduced the availability of consumer goods. Runaway inflation threatened. The danger was attacked in a variety of ways. Wages were stabilized at an increase of about 15 per cent and rents were "frozen." An Office of Price Administration (OPA) attempted to fix the prices of consumer goods and rationed products in short supply, such as meat, sugar, gasoline, shoes, and canned goods. The federal government reduced civilian purchasing power by taxes on small incomes as well as large, taken directly out of payrolls. There was a determined effort to persuade people to buy war bonds, which would defer purchasing power until later. This many-sided attack on inflation was not completely successful, but it undoubtedly did immense good. The cost of living rose 29 per cent between 1939 and 1945 as compared with 63 per cent during the First World War (1914-1918). In the Second World War there was greater effort than in the first to limit profiteering. In addition to heavier corporation and excess profits taxes there were surtaxes on high incomes that reached the almost confiscatory figure of 94 per cent. Far more than the earlier "soak-the-rich" taxes, the war taxes tended to redistribute the wealth. Civil Liberties World War II did not inspire the enthusiasm or idealism of either the Civil War or World War I. The prevailing attitude was that beating the Axis was a dirty job that simply had to be done. There were few' war songs, and none to compare with "John Brown's Body," "Dixie," or "Over There." At the same time there was little effective opposition to the war. There was on the whole less invasion of civil liberties during this war than in earlier ones. Conscientious objectors were treated leniently. The press and radio agreed to voluntary censorship and were in turn freed from much direct control. Government propaganda was on no such mammoth scale as in 1917-1918. But on one important occasion the rights of civilians were violated by the federal government on a scale never before seen. In the excitement following the attack on Pearl Harbor, over a hundred thousand Japa- ftS4 Tin- Roosevelt Years ncse-Americans, most of thorn citizens, were routed from their homes and herded into detention camps. It is estimated that they lost nearly half their property. That this forced "re- location" was unnecessary was revealed hv the loyalty of Japanese-Americans in Hawaii during the war, as well as by the fine fighting record of Nisei (Japanese-American) troops. The Election of 1944 In spite of occasional dire predictions that once at war the United States would throw the Constitution overboard, elections were held as usual. The Republicans made heavy gains in the congressional elections of 1942, when the war was going badly. There were hopes, therefore, of a Republican victory in the presidential election of 1944. The Republican nominee was Thomas E. Dewey, governor of New York, who had achieved nation-wide fame as a district attorney prosecuting racketeers in New York City. The Democrats renominated Roosevelt for a fourth term. Dewey chose not to attack the New Deal. He was unable to criticize effectively the conduct of the war, since victory was in sight. He promised, however, to provide new and vigorous administration to replace the "tired old men" of the Democratic administration. The Democrats maintained that the great problems of war and peace must be kept in experienced hands. Once again the voters agreed with this argument. Although Dewey faired slightly better than Wilkie in 1940, Roosevelt again won the presidency by a wide margin. The problems faced by the United States in the field of foreign affairs in World War II all centered, naturally, on achieving victory over the Axis. As one historian has written, the aims of the United States were: ... to sustain and fortify the tottering British Empire; to keep alive the defeated French nation, almost inanimate under Hitler's heel but still alive and stirring in North Africa; to arm ... the swarming Russian legions; and to prevent the remaining neutrals, Spain, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey, from falling prey to the enemy: in short, to win the war in Europe, then with Russia's hoped-for aid to knock out Japan in Asia: first VE Day, then VJ Day. Closely tied to the problems of fighting the war was the job of making arrangements for the peace which should follow. The Atlantic Charter, 1941 The most novel feature of the conduct of foreign afTairs during World War II was the way heads of state journeyed vast distances, often by air, to confer in person. President Roosevelt, especially, liked to make direct confrontation with rulers of other states. He had a somewhat exaggerated belief in his ability to arrive at effective agreements through persuasiveness and charm, as he had dealt with Congress members or members of his cabinet. The first great meeting of heads of state occurred before American entrance into the war when, in August 1941, Roosevelt and Churchill met on shipboard off the coast of Newfoundland and jointly issued the Atlantic Charter. This was a statement of the "common principles" on which depended "hopes for a better future for the world." It was somewhat similar, in both intention and content, to Wilson's Fourteen Points. It looked to a world in which aggression should cease, in which peoples should have the right to choose their form of government, in which natural resources should be shared to provide a better life for all, and in which the burden and fear of armaments should lie removed. It suggested, without specifying any of the details, a new world organization to keep the peace. Harry Truman gleefully displays a copy of a newspaper that had jumped to the conclusion that Dewey's early lead on election day, 1948, assured him victory. President, he defended no cause more strongly than equal rights for black Americans. When Congress refused to pass a law continuing the wartime Fair Employment Practices Commission, Truman resorted to executive action. In 1946 he appointed a fact-finding Commission on Civil Rights. I Ie told its members that he wanted to make the Bill of Rights apply equally to every .American. In 1947, the Commission published an eloquent report, To Secure These Rights. It made recommendations designed "to guarantee the same rights to every person regardless of who he is, where he lives, or what his racial, re- ligous, or national origins are." The commission's recommendations went beyond erasing discriminations against blacks. It urged, for instance, that immigration quotas be abolished and that West Coast Japanese-Americans who had been deprived of freedom and property in World War II be repaid for their losses. Congress refused to pass the laws recommended by the Commission on Civil Rights, hut Truman took a major step in his role as Com- mander-in-Chief. In 1948 he issued an order that there should be equality of opportunity for all members of the armed forces. The most important result of this order was the rapid elimination of segregated units. By the time Truman left office in 1933, segregation in the army, navy, and air force was greatly reduced. For the first time in the history of the United States, large numbers of blacks and whites lived together on a basis of equality. Election of 1948: A Political Miracle One reason for the deadlock between the President and the Republican leaders of the Complacence and Confrontation 725 One of the very few women who held high positions in American industry during the 1950's was Virginia Sink, an engineer for the Chrysler Corporation. Gains of Organized Labor During the 1950 s, organized labor was less militant than in the 1940's. This was principally because workers were better off. Wages had gone up so much that workers felt more and more that they were members of the middle class. Industrial peace also resulted front new attitudes on the part of management and union leaders. "Scientific management" was once a term that referred only to the mechanical efficiency of workers, eliminating waste motion, putting in more machinery, improving lighting and safety devices. Now a new philosophy of management stressed the idea that workers were human beings first and machine tenders second. With considerate treatment, a worker produced more. On the other side* of tl"e bargaining table, unions no longer had to fight for their right to exist. Labor peace was also advanced when the American Federation of Labor and the CIO settled their old feud (see p. 639). In 1955 they merged into a vast new "union of unions," the AFL-CIO. The merger greatly reduced the nuisance of jurisdictional disputes that had occurred when two unions were struggling to organize workers in the same plant. Strikes continued, but on no such scale as right after World War II. Most disputes were settled by direct bargaining. "Welfare capitalism" in the form of pension plans, vacations with pay, and free or inexpensive medical care became the rule rather than the exception. The number of workers in organized labor increased from less than four million on the eve of the New Deal to over eighteen million in the mid-1950's. Then it started to decline. This was partly the result of resistance to unions expressed in state "right to work" laws. Even more, it probably resulted from the fact that higher wage scales made unions seem less useful. Farm Problems and Policies Most farmers did not share in "Eisenhower prosperity^." Between 1948 and 1956 the farmers' share of the national income dropped from 9 to 4 percent. In Eisenhower s first term, perhaps half a million farmers gave up and left the soil. The agricultural policies of the Eisenhower administration hastened the decline of the small family farm with diversified crops. Farm policy' favored efficiency. Large, one-crop farms were more efficient. Only the fanners with large capital could purchase the latest machinery, use the latest scientific methods, and buy or lease the best lands. Even in a falling market, they could reduce their costs so much that they could still make a profit. By 1959 half the farmland in this country belonged to the one farmer in 25 who owned 1000 acres or more. Signifying the change in American agriculture, the term "agribusiness" (agriculture + business) came into the language. The forgotten people in agriculture were the seasonal farm workers who followed the harvests around the country. Many of the migrants were Mexican-Americans from the Southwest. Probably even more came from Mexico itself. Under an agreement (1942) and a law (1951), 726 Ah Age of Anxiety Many farm workers were Mexican-Americans who migrated through the United States, following the crops. Here they pick tomatoes in Florida. as many as 400,000 braceros (transient Mexican laborers) were admitted each year on temporary visas. There were also large numbers (an estimated million in 19.54) of "wetbacks"—Mexi- cans who came into the United States illegally. These migrant workers worked long hours for low pay. They were protected neither by the National Labor Relations Act nor by federal minimum wage laws. Their living conditions were often deplorable and their children grew up with little, if any, schooling. Slow Progress for Blacks The rapid economic advance of blacks during and after World War II slowed down in the 1950's. Especially in the South, blacks were victims of advancing technology. A mechanical cotton picker that only large-scale farmers could afford drove many black farmers off the land and greatly reduced the demand for farm labor. The introduction of automation cut the demand for unskilled and semi-skilled workers in a great variety of businesses. There was some progress in putting an end to the humiliating practice of forced segregation of black people. President Eisenhower picked up where Truman had left off and completed integration of the armed forces. By persuasion and by discreet use of executive power, Eisenhower managed to integrate public facilities such as swimming pools and private facilities such as hotels, theaters, and restaurants in the District of Columbia. The Supreme Court joined the fight against racial discrimination. As we have seen, in the case of Brown v. Board of Education, May 1954, the Court declared that local laws establishing separate schools for black and white children were a violation of the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. This was a complete reversal of Plessy c. Ferguson (1896), which had supported the right of a state to supply "separate but equal" public accommodations. The desegregation decision was generally obeyed by school authorities in the North, in some of the border states, and in the District of Columbia. In the South, school desegregation was to come more slowly. President Eisenhower did not take vigorous action to enforce the desegregation decision in the South. It was not until Governor Orval Faubus of Arkansas defied a court order to allow black students into a school at Little Rock, Arkansas, that the President acted. Calling out federal troops. Eisenhower forced the Little Rock authorities to accept nine black high school students. The Supreme Court had struck down various legal methods whereby southern states kept black citizens from voting. But custom and intimidation kept most blacks from registering to vote or going to the polls. Congress passed Civil Rights Acts in 1957 and 1959 to protect the blacks' right to vote. Here too the Eisenhower administration was cautious. In the years 1957- 1960, the Department of Justice brought only Charisma and Catastrophe John K. Galbraith's The Affluent Society (see p. 727 ). Harrington agreed with Galbraith that the productive capacity of America was so great that all people should be able to live well. He disagreed, however, with Galbraith's claim that only "pockets" of poverty remained. Instead, he insisted that perhaps forty million Americans, a quarter of the population, were poor. He thought this a disgrace. Harrington said that the public was unaware of this vast mass of human misery because in various ways the poor were invisible. In the cities, they were concentrated in slums hidden from the eyes of those who lived in prosperous suburbs. In rural areas they were found especially in Appalachia and the deep South, far from the highways traveled by tourists. Many poor were elderly people leading "lives of quiet desperation" in secluded rooms. According to The Other America, much of the poverty afflicting this country was caused by the very technology that created its vast wealth. Automa- QUESTION • Should the Hon killed the federal Hovemment help jobs of many un- out small farmers so they skilled and semi- can stay on the land? skilled workers, who were then unable to find steady employment. Small farmers could no longer make a decent living in competition with the big landowners who could afford the latest agricultural machinery. Harrington insisted that poor people were often trapped in circumstances from which they could not escape. Lyndon Johnson's Great Society program was designed to change such life patterns. Help for the Poor and Neglected The Great Society laws extended federal influence into areas previously reserved for local government or private enterprise. It was directed especially toward help for the poor and neglected. Roth aspects of the program were displayed by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965. For the first time, the federal government gave direct, massive aid to public and parochial schools. The money was to be spent in ways that would especially benefit children of low-income families. A parallel act to aid colleges provided scholarships for needy students. Still a third law established a Job Corps to train unskilled workers, especially school dropouts. Another cluster of laws supplied direct assistance to the poor. A new agency, the Office of Economic Opportunity (OEO), was put in charge of a vast Anti-Poverty Program. It was granted power in some cases to overrule local governments. The purpose was not simply to provide relief, but to help the poor to help themselves. Thus the OEO promoted "Community Action Programs" (CAP) that taught the poor methods of working together for purposes as diverse as establishing nursery schools and cleaning up parks. The CAP also taught people how to organize protests and how to put pressure on landlords, employers, and government agencies. After nearly twenty years of controversy. Congress finally passed a "Medicare" Act that provided people over sixty-five with hospital and nursing home care. Medical centers were to be established where medical faciliHes were scarce. Medical schools received funds to increase enrollments and so to avert a shortage of doctors. Fairer Immigration Policy For over forty years, the immigratton policy of the United States had discriminated in favor of people from northwestern Europe. A system of national quotas was both unjust and ridiculous. Tims, out of a total of 157,000 immigrants admitted per year. Great Britain and Ireland 752 An Age of Anxiety were allotted 83,000. India, with a population of 450,000,000, and Andorra, with 6,400, each had the minimum quota of 100. Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy had all assailed the racist aspects of the quota system, but without persuading Congress to make changes. By the Immigration Act of 1965 national quotas were abolished. The law established a "glolxil" quota and favored people with special skills. "Consensus" Lyndon Johnson owed some of his success as a legislator to his belief in "consensus." In terms of practical politics consensus meant something for everybody. Businesspeople were pleased when Congress, at Johnson's urging, abandoned excise taxes on hundred of items— furs, jewelry, TV sets, theater tickets. Business gained by the poverty program. Not only did it increase purchasing power, but corporations were hired to run Job Corps centers. Johnson's program included the now almost traditional subsidies to farmers. To aid labor unions, the President urged repeal of Section 14-b of the Taft-Hartley Act that allowed states to pass "right to work" laws outlawing the union shop. The farm bill went through Congress, but the repeal of Section 14-b failed to pass the Senate. The President had reason to boast that the 89th Congress produced "the greatest outpouring of creative legislation in the history of this nation." But to translate the legislative blueprint for the Great Society into effective legislation required large sums of money. It was therefore necessary to reduce or at least keep in check the even vaster amounts demanded by the Department of Defense. Full-scale domestic reform demanded peace abroad. Equalizing the Right to Vote In March 1965. Martin Luther King, Jr. organized a "March of Freedom" from Selma, Alabama, to Montgomery, the state capital, fifty "I have a dream today ..." Martin Luther King addressing the great "March on Washington" ot 1963. (See p. 743.) miles away. King's purpose was to dramatize the fact that many blacks were still denied the right to vote in states of the deep South. In Selma, black citizens outnumbered whites, but they composed only three percent of the voters. Over 400 white members of the clergy joined the demonstration. The marchers were harassed by police and by unruly mobs. One white minister was killed. The march was able to reach Montgomery only after President Johnson had sent federal troops and FBI agents to provide protection. Meanwhile, Johnson appeared before a joint session of Congress to demand that at long last all black citizens should be guaranteed the right to vote. In response to the President's plea, Congress passed the Voting Bights Act of 1965. It empowered the federal government to register voters in any district where less than 50 percent of adults were on the voting lists, or where it Charisma and Catastrophe appeared that local officials were discriminating against Macks seeking to register as voters. Johnson ordered scores of "examiners" to sign up voters in the deep South. In a single year, they registered over 400,000 people. The Voting Rights Act of 1965 also aided other minorities. It rendered illegal a New York State law that required voters to be able to read English. Now Puerto Ricans who read only Spanish were allowed to vote. Similarly Span- ish-speaking Mexican-Americans in Southwestern states gained the franchise. In 1964, the Twenty-Fourth Amendment to the Constitution QUESTION • What re- (see pp. 152-153) strictions, if any, should be abolished pay- placed on the right to vote? ment of a (roll tax as a qualification for voting in federal elections. The poll tax requirement had been a means whereby states kept poor people from the polls. During the 1960 s, equal voting rights were also promoted by a notable series of decisions handed down by the Supreme Court, headed bv Earl Warren. The Court forbade states to define the boundaries of election districts in such a way as to discriminate against blacks. It forbade states to set up districts with unequal population for electing members of state legislatures and of the United States House of Representatives, Up to this time the number of people in congressional districts had varied greatly. In Michigan, for example, it took six or seven times as many people to elect a representative in Detroit as in country districts. The population of voting districts for state legislatures had varied even more wildly. In California a single state senator represented over six million people in Los Angeles, and another represented only fourteen thousand in a rural district. To remedy these injustices, the Supreme Court applied the so-called "one man, one vote" principle. This meant that voting districts for a legislative body should contain the same number of people. Thus one person's vote is worth as much as another's. The Selma March of Freedom that helped to produce the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was the last great triumph for Martin Luther King, Jr. It was also the last victory for what King stood for: blacks and whites working together in non-violent demonstrations. King's insistence on Christian love and turning the other cheek seemed to many blacks a form of "Uncle Tom- ism." Although blacks had gained rights that would have seemed surprising ten years earlier, they still had not gained equality. The improvement in economic status of blacks in comparison with that of whites, begun during World War II, had by now practically ceased. This glacial progress created in blacks a mood of frustration and a new militance. Many felt that black Americans must no longer wait for whites to bestow rights on them but must seize them for themselves. The goal now, as preached by radical leaders such as Stokely Carmichael of SNCC (Students Non-Violent Coordinating Committee), was "black power." Black power certainly meant political action. Carmichael defined this as "the coming together of black people to elect representatives and to force these representatives to speak to their needs." For the first time since Reconstruction, blacks began to be a force in southern politics. In the 1964 presidential election, black votes supplied Johnson's winning margin over Cold- water in Arkansas, Florida, Texas, and Virginia. Blacks elected increasing numbers of local and state officials in the South. In the North, in 1967, blacks were elected mayors of Cleveland, Ohio, and Gary, Indiana. Perhaps inevitably, given what blacks had suffered for three centuries, some black leaders An Age of Anxiety The year 1968 saw student protests in foreign countries as well as in the U.S. Some were violent, while others, such as this demonstration against the Vietnam War, were peaceful. Robert Kennedy's death removed from American politics a young man who had an extraordinary sympathy for and ability to communicate with those most alienated from American society—the poor, the blacks, many of the young, the Chicanos, and the American Indians. Late in April, another form of violence had jolted the public. Hundreds of radical students seized buildings of Columbia University in New York City. They were evicted only after an attack by a thousand police armed with nightsticks. The Columbia riot touched off a wave of turmoil in a score or more institutions of higher learning throughout the country. Student violence was not limited to the United States. In the previous year there had been student riots, some of them more serious than any in the United States, in Rio de Janeiro, London, Rome, Madrid, as well as beyond the Iron Curtain in Warsaw and Prague. The same week as the Columbia outbreak, French students battled police in the streets of Paris and were joined by millions of workers in a great general strike. The world outlook was further darkened by events in Czechoslovakia. There in the spring of 1968 student protests triggered a rebellion. The Czechs overthrew the repressive Stalinist regime that had been imposed on the country in 1948. A new premier restored freedom of speech and press, freer contact with the West, and a measure of democracy. The men of the Kremlin could not tolerate such freedoms. In late August, 200,000 Russian troops with tanks and machine- guns overran Czechoslovakia. Unable to resist, the Czechs unhappily submitted. Meanwhile, prospects for restoring peace in Vietnam grew dim. Diplomats from the United States and North Vietnam met in Paris in May. But they could not agree on a formula for ending hostilities. After a lull, the war continued unabated, and the number of American troops in Vietnam reached a new high. Early in August, the Republican National Convention, meeting in the South for the first time, convened at Miami Beach, Florida. at work since the end of World War II continued at an accelerated pace to reshape the American social landscape. The Black Revolution had the effect of making other minority groups in the country more aware of inferior status and more determined to demand equality. Other groups could—and did—effectively employ the techniques of protest developed by- black leaders—sit-ins, marches, political organization, lobbying, threatened and actual violence. Chicanos Next to blacks, the largest minority group in the country are the Ilispanos, or Spanish-speak- ing people. They number over 11,000,000. New York City contains perhaps 2,000,000 Hispanos, mostly from Puerto Rico. Part of Miami, Florida, is a "Little Havana," inhabited by hundreds of thousands of Cuban immigrants. The largest group of Hispanos are the Mexi- can-Americans or Chicanos, who are mostly to be found in the southwestern states. Some Chi- canos are descendants of people who settled in the region in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Many more came in the twentieth century. The latter include an unknown num- hor of "wetbacks," who entered the United States illegally. Although the Chicanos have faced less legal discrimination than black Americans, they have nevertheless suffered from prejudice. A report on the status of Chicanos in Texas in 1959 observed: Social discrimination manifests itself in a variety of ways: refusing service in barbershops, soda fountains, cafes, drive-ins, beauty parlors, hotels, hare, and recreation centers; segregation in housing, movies, schools, churches, and cemeteries . . ., reluctant service in hospitals, social welfare offices, and courts; mid even refusing to permit Mexican- American hostesses in USO's. Sometimes there are signs. "No Mexicans allowed," "Mexicans will be served in kitchen only." An Imperial Presidency A high proportion of Mexican-Americans have worked as seasonal farm workers. As such they were unprotected by federal minimum wage laws, unemployment insurance, or social security. The education of migrant children was often scanty and was frequently interrupted. Chicano children living in settled communities and able to go to school were handicapped. They were often taught in English, a foreign language to the children, by teachers who knew no Spanish. Recently matters have changed for the better. Chicanos have found job opportunities in many parts of the country. They have organized to promote their interests. Similar to the blacks' National Association for the Advance- CZh ll*Cesar Estrada Chavez, Gandhian Chicano Cesar Estrada Chavez was born in 1927. When he was ten years old, he started working in the field with his parents. They earned a precarious living as laborers, following the crops from southern Arizona to northern California. Cesar received so little schooling that at the age of twenty-one he could barely read. Powerfully built, of medium height, his coal-black hair and brown skin reveal Indian ancestors. Prom young manhood Chavez was determined to improve the lives of his fellow Chicanos. In 1965 he embarked on what seemed to be a hopeless cause: the creation of an effective labor union among seasonal workers. As head of the AFL-CIO United Farm Workers Organizing Committee, Chavez was master of customary trade union tactics—picketing, strikes, and boycotts. He was also a devoted follower of Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King, Jr. He preached and practiced what he called "militant nonviolence." Like Gandhi he led a life of extreme austerity. He lived on as little as S5.00 a week. When members of his union engaged in violence, Chavez—like the Hindu leader in similar circumstances—fasted for twenty-three days. Like Gandhi and King, Chavez Is profoundly religious. A devout Catholic, he attends mass daily. Chavez had displayed remarkable ability to work with others. He insists that he works on behalf of all laborers, not merely Chicanos. He threatened to quit his union if it discriminated against Filipinos. He organized an unlikely nationwide coalition of labor union members, housewives, college students, Protestant ministers, and Catholic bishops to boycott California grapes picked by non-union labor. The boycott was so effective that it cut grape sales in New York City by a third. Finally, after five years of agitation, most California grape growers gave in and signed a contract with Chavez' union. Chavez has not been wholly successful. Against his wishes, members of his union have engaged in violence and intimidation. He was far less effective in organizing workers in Florida. Texas, and Arizona than in California. His United Farm Workers' Union had a ten-year struggle with a rival union organized by the Teamsters. Finally, in 1977, the Teamsters gave in and agreed that Chavez alone might organize those who labored in the fields. Chavez is a man who, to quote his own words, has tried "to 'overcome' with love and compassion, with hard work and long hours, with stamina and patient tenacity, with truth and public appeal, with mobility and discipline, with politics and law, with prayer and fasting." Just before his assassination in 1968, Robert Kennedy called Chavez "one of the greatest of living Americans." An Age of Anxiety ment of Colored People (NAACP) is the League of United Latin-American Citizens (LULAC). This organization has won suits in federal courts to guarantee Chicanos the right to serve on juries, to send their children to unsegregated schools, and to receive instruction in Spanish as well as English. The Chicanos are also beginning to be active in politics. Chicanos have been elected to local and state offices in the Southwest. They have sent their first members to the 1 louse of Representatives and the Senate. Like the blacks, Mexican-Americans have developed a new pride in their identity. They welcome the term "Chicano," formerly a badge of inferiority. Puerto Ricans Puerto Ricans, as residents of a commonwealth of the United States, are free to enter the United States proper without restriction. Beginning after World War II, thousands of islanders sought to escape the poverty of their homeland by flocking to the cities of the Northeast such as New York and Newark and later to Midwestern cities. Like many immigrants of the early 190()'s, they were rural in background and had difficulty adjusting to the complicated ways of American cities. Their problem was compounded by the fact that they were faced with almost as much discrimination as American blacks. The jobs they could get were low paying. They often had to settle for inadequate housing. But their status gradually improved. They were able to find better jobs, many started their own businesses, and they began to become a political force in the cities in which they lived. In 1970 the first representative to Congress of Puerto Rican origin, Herman Badillo, was elected from New York City. The Lot of American Indians: "Red Power" At the close of the nineteenth century, American Indians were a vanishing race. Now that is no longer true. Of all racial minorities, however, they share least in the benefits of .American life. A study made in 1966 revealed that Indians suffered so much from malnutrition and disease that their life expectancy was 46 years, compared w ith a national average approaching 70 years. They had less formal schooling than any other minority group. Family income was less than half the national average. Most Indian reservations, where about half the Indians lived as wards of the federal government, were on arid, worn-out lands. During the 1960's the Indians displayed a new militancy. In the state of Washington, men from over fifty Indian tribes joined a "fish-in." They deliberately broke game laws and risked imprisonment to protest loss of their former fishing and hunting rights. In South Dakota, Sioux tribes organized a statewide referendum against a law' to give the state direct control over their reservations. The law was defeated by a four-to-one vote, and the Sioux celebrated with traditional war dances. A National Congress of American Indians proclaimed "Red Power." It demanded that the paternalistic policies of the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs be abandoned. "We simply want to run our lives our own way," said a young leader of the Congress. "Our own way" meant that many Indians wanted to retain or return to their ancient cultures, their rituals, their dances, their tribal organizations, their languages. In 1973, a more militant Indian group, the American Indian Movement (AIM), seized the Indian reservation settlement of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, by force of arms to dramatize the Indian cause. They demanded that lands taken from Indians in violation of treaties be returned to them and that development pro- An Imperial Presidency grams on reservations be managed by tribal governments. There was evidence that at long last white Americans might try to deal justly with Indians. In 1970 the Pueblo Indians of Taos, New Mexico, regained the Sacred Blue Lake, a place vital to their religious life. In 1972 millions of acres of land in Alaska were guaranteed to Indians and Eskimos. In 1975 a federal court decided that the Passamaquoddy and Penobscot Indians had a valid legal claim to over half the state of Maine, along with $25 billion in damages and unpaid rents. Lawyers of the Interior and Justice Departments argued on their behalf. Indians in Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, and North Carolina also, brought suit to recover tribal lands. Rebellion on the Campus In the 1960's and early 1970's young people were leaders in every movement to promote social justice. Their activities centered above all on college campuses. Revolutionary activity had long been a tradition of universities in countries as diverse as France, Argentina, Japan, and Czarist Russia. American college students, however, had generally been indifferent to movements seeking to alter the existing order. In the United States, so-called "college life" centered on having a good time—on proms, football weekends, fraternities and sororities. Observers of American college students in the 1950's described them as an apathetic generation. All they wanted, it appeared, was to prepare for jobs in an affluent society. At this time Clark Kerr, president of the University of California at Berkeley, observed: "The employers will love this generation; they are not going to press any grievances. They are going to be easy to handle. There ar< n't going to be any riots." But suddenly a striking change of mood occurred. It first appeared, ironically enough, at Clark Ken's own Berkeley campus, where in 1964 there was a riot involving thousands of students. Agitation for redress of student grievances spread to hundreds of institutions of higher learning. Conservatives insisted that parents, schools, and colleges had become too permissive. They regarded campus rebellions as the temper tantrums of spoiled children on a large scale. Those who took the side of the students argued that college students were more intelligent and better educated than ever, more disposed to question established beliefs, more eager to play a role in society. They were shocked by the contrasts lretween ugly facts of American life and the ideals of a society that claimed to provide "liberty and justice for all." Certainly a large element in bringing on the new mood was a "generation gap" between students and their elders. This was summed up in the slogan, "Trust no one over thirty." Students developed a distinct culture, with characteristic styles of dress and behavior that dismayed older people. The new campus generation professed to be indifferent to vocational advancement and material success. Instead, they were interested in self-realization, in "do- ing their own thing." A principal target of the students was the colleges and universities themselves. Demands made on hundreds of campuses included: abolition of codes of dress, attendance, and behavior; a more flexible curriculum, relevant to "the real world"; less rigid marking systems; participation in the decision-making process of institutions. It was the Vietnam War that fanned rebellion to massive proportions. In fact, opposition to the war originated on the campuses of the country. Sit-ins and demonstrations marked each step in the escalation of the war. I lundreds of students publicly burned their draft cards to show their distaste for the war. 