Europeans knew of Africa and the slave trade. They had heard of Asia Minor. Its capital, Constantinople, had fallen to the Turks in 1453. Europeans traded with India, and from travelers like Marco Polo they even heard accounts of China and Japan. But America was a surprise. Explorers stumbled on it while searching for a new route to India and China. To the settlers who followed the explorers, the people already living in the new land were a mystery. At first the Europeans called them "noble savages" and thought they needed only the benefit of Christian teaching. Soon, however, they were looked upon as murderous devils, treacherous and best shot or driven away. The descendants of the Europeans are only now beginning to understand these American Indians. A people from Asia. The American Indian, like the European settler, migrated from the Old World. No fossil remains have yet been found to show that human fife began independently in the Americas. Scientists who study such questions believe instead that the first Americans crossed from eastern Siberia to Alaska. The latest methods of scientific dating keep pushing back the time of this migration. But it was at least 25,000 years ago and may have been over 50,000. For several thousand years Asian peoples crossed Alaska and wandered slowly southward along the west coast of North .America. Some traveled eastward toward the Atlantic, settling beside rivers and lakes. Others migrated into Central and South America. In fact, some did not end their journey down the South .American continent until they stood at Cape Horn, its southern tip. Different life-styles. North American Indians lived in varied ways. These ranged from great stone cities, built by the Aztecs of Mexico, to tepees, the mobile homes of the Plains Indians. Indian tribes were usually organized around a chief or king, and many had tribal councils in which each clan, or family group, was represented. North of what is now Mexico, the Indians had little metal and made their tools and weapons out of stone. When they wanted to clear part of a forest, they killed the trees by simply peeling away a ring of bark. But even in this northern area there were many differences in Indian culture. For example, 56 families of North American languages and hundreds of dialects have been identified. Read here of how The first Americans came from Asia. They took up different ways of living. But all stayed close to nature. Europeans and Indians influenced one another. 1488 Portuguese round the tip of Africa. 1492 Columbus makes his first voyage. 1513 Ponce de Lebn discovers Florida. 1519 Cortes finds Mexico City. 1565 St. Augustine, Florida, founded. 1585 The first English colony is started. 1588 The Spanish Armada is defeated. 1603 Champlain explores the northeast. 1608 The French found Quebec. 1624 Dutch establish New Amsterdam. Of about twenty million Indians who lived in the New World just before the Europeans arrived, there were perhaps 300,000 east of the Mississippi. Most of these had built permanent settlements and lived by farming. The women among them tended the fields, while the men added to the food supply by hunting and fishing. Some Indian settlements included regular streets, well-managed gardens, and large social and religious centers. Beyond the Mississippi, on the Great Plains, tribes of wandering Indians followed the buffalo herds year after year. From the herds they got not only their food but their clothing, fuel, and shelter. In the Southwest there was a more settled agricultural life, although the Navaho and Apache of that region were good hunters. The Pueblo Indians of the Southwest built community houses on plateaus that were easy to defend. There they wove cloth and grew a variety of crops. European influence. It is hard to imagine some of these Indian cultures as they must have been before the coming of the whites. In others the Europeans changed the Indians' way of living even before coming in contact with them. For instance, when we think of the Plains people, we picture a culture that made use of horses for migration, for war, and for hunting buffalo. Yet horses had died out in North America during the Ice Age. American Indians knew nothing of them until they were brought here by the Spaniards. The Indians had used dogs to haul their goods until they caught wild horses that were born of European runaways. Suddenly the people of the Plains had the speed and ease of movement that later explorers saw in the 1800s. They assumed it must be something timeless and entirely American. Actually, it was a recent and highly creative change in the Indian methods of hunting and traveling—a sort of technological revolution. Another example of the way Indian civilization could adapt was in its methods of government. Five Indian tribes or nations—the Mohawk, Cayuga, Oneida, Onandaga, and Seneca—formed the Iroquois confederacy. This very complicated system of government had existed before the French and English came. But the fur trade with these Europeans made the confederacy far more powerful. Very quickly it came to dominate all the tribes of the Northeast. So the popular idea of Indians living in a changeless, unprogressive, Stone Age culture simply does not fit the facts. Just as Indians adapted to the coming of the Europeans, Europeans learned from the Indians. Indians taught the newcomers how to live in the forest: how to clear it; how to hunt and trap game; how to fashion moccasins, snowshoes, and canoes. They introduced the whites to com, sweet potatoes, tobacco, cotton, lima beans, peanuts, and maple sugar. It was only by eating Indian corn that the earliest settlers managed to survive their first terrible winters in North America. The Indian and nature. Toward the wilderness of the eastern woodlands, the animals and forests within it, the plains stretching westward, and the sky that covered all, Indians held feelings unlike those of Europeans. The land was an important part of the Indians' religion, and religion made the Indians one with the forces of nature. It bound them to the moon, stars, wind, and rain. It bound them to the deer to which they addressed a prayer of apology as they drew back their arrows to shoot it. It bound them to the sun that they called "my relative." Whites, on the other hand, claimed that their religion encouraged them to conquer the earth and expand their settlements. The Bible said that God had commanded: "Be fruitful and increase and fill the earth and subdue it. Rule over . . , every living thing." (Genesis 1:28.) The Indians felt that they were temporary residents on the land, that they were its caretakers. The Omaha warrior sang, " I shall vanish and be no more, but the land over which I now roam shall remain and change not." Most tribes held goods in common, and some lacked the idea of private property altogether. Tribal ownership of land merely meant the right to use it. Indians were willing to share that use with 22 others. But they simply could not accept the European idea of real estate as some- The vividly painted buckskin used for ceremonial dances shows signs and symbols of nature. thing fenced off for one's exclusive use. English settlers thought themselves wonderfully generous if they were willing to buy land. But their offers always astonished the Indians. "Sell the country?" exclaimed the warrior chief Tecumseh. "Why not sell the air, the clouds, the Great Sea?" For their part, whites never understood that the chief of a tribe could not sell them land owned by the tribe as a whole. Yet by hook or by crook these settlers managed to "buy" or take away most of it. The clash of two cultures. The saddest thing about the struggle between Indian and European settler was that it seemed impossible to avoid. Here, on an untouched continent, two peoples met and clashed. The Europeans came first to look for gold and later to build towns, plantations, shipyards, and in time factories. Everywhere that the settler advanced, the Indian was forced to withdraw. And so in the course of the hundreds of years it took the frontier to move from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific, the Indians were finally conquered and driven from their homelands. List these numbers on a sheet of paper; then beside each write an / if the sentence would be more true of American Indians, an E if it would be more true of European settlers, or a 6 if it would be true of both. 1. They spoke hundreds of different languages. 2. They saw themselves as caretakers of the land. 3. They felt it was their right and duty to control nature. 4. They adopted new ways of living from the other group. 5. They are only now beginning to understand the others' history and culture. Jews and Catholics. Williams's dealings with the Indians were a model of Christian honesty and fairness. "Ready wit and bold spirit." The next challenger was Anne Hutchinson. Even Governor Winthrop called her "a woman of ready wit and bold spirit." She was accused of believing that it was not necessary to attend a church, or belong to one, in order to win a place in heaven. She even questioned the need to obey the law. Mrs. Hutchinson's following was much larger than Roger Williams's had been. So the dispute over her teachings split the Massachusetts Colony into warring camps. In a sense Anne Hutchinson was also an early victim of discrimination. Much of the hostility to her was due not only to the fact that she was teaching false doctrines, but that she was teaching them to men. "We do not mean to [argue] w'ith those of your sex," Governor Winthrop huffed at her trial. Although she answered the charges against her with brilliance, Anne Hutchinson was banished by the court. She wandered with her followers first to Rhode Island, then to New York. There she and her children died in an Indian attack. Masters of guerrilla warfare. In their own eyes New Englanders always dealt fairly with the Indians. They tried to convert them to Christianity, and they usually paid something for the Indian lands they took. But as in Virginia, they disrupted the Indians' lives. From time to time there were outbreaks of fighting, and these always ended in the same way: the Indians were totally defeated and immediately lost their lands to the whites. The last great Indian war in New England took place in the 1670s. A local chief, King Philip, was a gifted leader. He believed the Indians had to make a stand against the white advance before it was too late. Then, in 1675, the colonists executed three of Philip's tribesmen for killing an Indian who had been helpful to them. The war that followed almost wiped out the colony. The Indians were masters of guerrilla warfare. They burned towns and killed whites, but they would not be drawn into a pitched battle. Slowly, however, the settlers gained the upper hand. Philip was hunted down and killed. The remainder of his tribe, even his wife and son, were sold into slavery in the West Indies. By 1678, the Indian defeat was total* Like the Virginians to their south, the New Englanders were now in complete control of the country around their settlements. But they, too, paid a price. One sixteenth of the white population perished, and the military costs equalled millions of dollars in modern money. List the numbers of these sentences on a piece of paper. Beside each write a P if the sentence is true of the people of Plymouth, an M if it is true of those at Massachusetts Bay, a J if it is true of those at Jamestown, and an O if it is true of none of them. 1. They wished to separate from the Church of England. 2. They dealt harshly with those whose religious views were unlike their own. 3. They came to depend heavily on slaves from Africa. 4. They lived in peace with their Indian neighbors. 5. They came to the New World in a large, well-financed movement. 6. They tried to buy out the company that sent them. 7. They had the first representative government in British America. 8. They were strictly controlled by the king. 9. They moved westward as groups of church members. 10. Their charter made them almost self-governing. ' In 1664 the English took New Netherlands from the Dutch, immediately renaming it New York and New Jersey (page 33). England then controlled most of the eastern shore of North America. Its colonies stretched from the French lands on the St. Lawrence River in the north to Spanish Florida in the south (map on page 44). Eighteen years later, William Penn began settling Pennsylvania. Penn was as firm a believer in religious liberty as Roger Williams (page 49). His tolerant attitude drew people who were suffering religious persecution; they came from all parts of northwestern Europe. Non-English additions were making the middle colonies what all America would one day become: a land of many peoples, races, and religions. Steadiness and hard work. The population of the English colonies grew fantastically (graph on page 52). Part of the growth came about because the birth rate was much higher than the death rate, but there was another reason. Around 1700 England developed a greater need for skilled workers and laborers. So it stopped encouraging migration to America. But as the colonies still needed people, existing laws against non-English people in the New World were eased. After 1700 a rising tide of immigrants from other Read here of how The English controlled the Atlantic seaboard. Their colonies attracted other Europeans. Women had advantages in colonial times. American society differed from European. parts of Europe outstripped those from England. In the 1600s Germany had been the scene of ferocious religious wars, A few Germans came to English America at that time to escape persecution. William Penn was especially impressed by their steadiness and hard work, and he tried to attract more of them with pamphlets in the German and Dutch languages. Between 1710 and 1770 almost a quarter of a million more Germans, called Pennsylvania Dutch, came to America. (The name was misleading; they left from the Netherlands, but not all had lived there.) The Pennsylvania Dutch came for religious freedom 2,250. 2,000- 1,750. 8 1,500. jE 1,000. - 750. 500. 250. 8 2 g s ? n s Which ten-year period shows the greatest growth in numbers? In percentage? and to share in the fertile lands of the Susquehanna Valley. By the 1740s increasing numbers of them also made their way along the Shenandoah River into the back- country of the South (map on page 44). All of Ireland. The Scots-Irish too came in great numbers. They were Presbyterians (strict Protestants like the Puritans). The English government had moved them from Scotland to Northern Ireland to help control the Irish Catholics. The Scots-Irish were willing to leave their second home and seek a third one for a number of reasons. They had not been welcomed by their Irish neighbors (naturally). They hated the Church of England and their English landlords (who kept raising their rents). And the English, being worried about their own weavers, killed off a flourishing textile trade of Northern Ireland. So the Scots-Irish poured into the New World, especially to the middle and southern colonies. One Pennsylvanian exclaimed, "It looks as if Ireland is ready to send all its inhabitants hither." These new .Americans were self-reliant, but they disliked authority of any kind. Settling on the frontier, they began at once to stir up trouble with the Indians. Badly needed skills. Sizable numbers of French Huguenots, Welsh miners, and others also found their way to America. And hundreds of Scots captured in rebellion against the English were sent as indentured servants. The Huguenots were French Protestants. After 1685 they were no longer tolerated in their mostly Catholic homeland, and thousands of them came to the English colonies. They were townspeople, well trained in trade, crafts, and busi- ness—just what the new land needed most. Some settled in New York; an even larger group of Huguenots went to Charleston, South Carolina. Small numbers of Spanish and Portuguese Jews also arrived. Most of them settled in New York and in Newport, Rhode Island. All of the newcomers brought badly needed skills and labor. Their presence added color and variety to the colonial population. And they further weakened the ties between England and the colonies. Scattered families. Once in America the English and other Europeans changed many of their attitudes and ways of living. Even their views of the family were likely to be different. As they moved farther west into the interior of the country, still deeper changes took place. For instance, in Europe not only sons approved Adams's request for 27 ships, and the public quickly bought up war bonds to build them. After news of the American commissioners' experience had been fully reported, even Republicans rallied to the cause. An undeclared war. "It is too late to preach peace and to say we do not think of war. A defensive war must be waged, whether it is formally proclaimed or not," declared the Federalist Fisher Ames in April 1798. The only other choice was to give in, and no American was prepared to argue for that. An army of ten thousand was authorized, and Washington was called out of retirement to serve as com- mander-in-chief. Adams, however, objected to Hamilton's being his second-in- command. When Washington urged that Hamilton lie appointed, Adams unwillingly agreed, but he condemned Hamilton privately for "selfish vanity and aspiring ambition." The Administration pushed mostly for anion at sea, and soon a fleet of privateers was operating against the French. In a few months the powerful warships Constellation and United States, later joined by the Constitution, gave muscle to the new navy. If nothing else, the French government learned a hard lesson: the United States refused to be bullied. As 1798 closed, the French concluded that peace could be restored only if they were prepared to treat the young republic as an equal. Feelers were sent out, and Adams replied favorably by sending another mission to Paris. He did so without consulting his Cabinet, since he was sure that they would oppose his action. The Republicans, on the other hand, were overjoyed. In the long, difficult negotiations that ended in September 1800, both sides gave up something. The Americans surrendered their claims for damage to their ships, and the French admitted that the Alliance of 1778 was no longer binding on the United States. Adams and the Federalists were anxious to strengthen their party, so they used the war emergency as an excuse for attacking the Republicans. The Federalists organized committees to keep a check on all prominent Republicans, including Jefferson. Anyone who questioned government policy was suspected of being disloyal, if not an outright traitor. To keep their opponents down, the Federalists drew up a number of new laws. The Naturalization, Alien, and Sedition Acts. Nothing bothered the Federalists more than the way in which immigrants to the United States rushed to join the Republican Party. To slow them down, Congress approved a naturalization act that increased the years of residence required to become a citizen from five to fourteen. At the same time six states called for a Constitutional amendment that would bar any naturalized citizen from holding office. Just as bad in Federalist eyes was the number of foreigners who worked for the Republican cause. (Even the French minister had campaigned for Jefferson in the 1796 election!) So the Federalists also passed the Alien and Alien Enemies Acts. These gave the President the authority to expel any alien he judged "dangerous to the peace and safety of the United States." But the greatest uproar was caused by the Sedition Act. Although Adams had not asked for this law, he never questioned its The exciting Presidency of Andrew Jackson is sometimes called "an age of fer- ment." Change was sweeping the country, and its effects were felt in religion, education, business, and every other part of American life. Every social problem from the treatment of prisoners and the insane to the need for eliminating war was investigated. preached about, argued over. The political changes of those days were only the tip of an iceberg. "There is always some protester." In all of this, Americans had not been content with just showing the world the way to democracy. They wanted to create a society in which things could be tried that everyone had thought were impossible. Reform-minded people saw themselves as children of a successful revolution against British rule. To them revolution was natural. They welcomed it elsewhere in the world as an imitation of their own effon. And at home some of them were forever ready to demand the end of this or that abuse because it went against American beliefs. Ralph Waldo Emerson, the prophet of American reform, observed, "There is always .. . some protester against cruelty . . . some defender of the slave against the politician and the merchant, some champion of . . . humanity against the rich and luxurious . . . some pleader for Read here of how Religious groups changed in America. And helped to change America. peace . . . who will not stoop to infamy when all are gone mad." American reformers have always tended to believe that however unpopular they might be at the moment, they had the power of right on their side. "One man more right than his neighbor is a majority of one already," said Henry David Thoreau, one of the most famous protesters of them all. In the mid-1800s, Americans firmly believed in progress. Their nation was rapidly expanding toward the Pacific, and the railroad and telegraph were drawing the states and sections together. This seemed to them convincing proof that everything was moving in an upward direction. Progress and expansion made reformers sure that they could conquer all social evils. With so much going for them, how could they fail? Religions of the poor. Something like a religious revolution took place in the United States between 1790 and 1850. The first federal census, in 1790, showed the three largest churches to be the Anglican (Episcopalian), Presbyterian, and Congregational. But by the middle of the nineteenth century those groups had been displaced by the Roman Catholics, the Methodists, and the Baptists. All three of these churches had been persecuted in Great Britain. But in the United States they had flourished. They had one thing in common: they were the religions of the ordinary people and the poor. Catholicism had flourished as German and Irish immigrants poured into the country after 1840. To be sure. Catholics often faced discrimination, but their large numbers soon gave them political influence. They had not enjoyed that in Britain. Beecher's sermons against liquor were printed and circulated that year. In 1826 the American Society for the Promotion of Temperance was organized. From temperance presses poured grim stories of promising lives ruined by liquor. Ten years later the Society split into those who wanted to persuade individuals to drink less (temper- ance) and those who wanted to forbid all forms of alcohol by law (prohibition). The prohibitionists soon became more prominent. Prejudice against the foreign-born entered the prohibition campaign as German and Irish immigrants flowed into the country. Germans were used to gathering with their families on Sundays in beer halls and beer gardens. This practice outraged defenders of the strict Puritan sabbath. Older Americans also blamed the frequent poverty of the Irish immigrants on their drinking habits. Sharper restriction of the liquor trade soon followed. Numerous Massachusetts towns halted it altogether, and in 1851 Maine instituted statewide prohibition. There was a wave of imitations of the Maine law, but the campaign for prohibition soon died out. After 1855 it was replaced by concern for the problem of slavery (pages 250-253 in Chapter 10). 1. Trace the part played by organized religion in most of the reform movements of the early 1800s. 2. Show what Horace Mann did to improve education. Try writing a speech that he might have used to persuade a small town in Massachusetts to build a high school. From colonial days women had worked side by side with men in building a new w ay of life in America. Abigail Adams had urged her husband, John, to ''remember the ladies" as he and men from the other colonies met in Philadelphia to declare independence (page 81). But women were thought to be inferior to men both in physical strength and mental ability. They did not become full partners in the new democratic experience. A man's world. In the mid-1800s the rights of all women were limited by law and custom. Married women had the fewest rights. According to the laws of most states, husband and wife were one, and that one was the husband. A married woman could not sign contracts. She had no claim to money she earned. And she could not control property even when it was her own. A father could make it part of his will that if he died, his children should be taken from their mother's control. Furthermore. as late as 1850 in most states a Read here of how Women won some basic human rights. They produced inspired leaders. And took up new careers. But still had less than full equality. needs. Since women were already expected to take part in church activities, this opened a new avenue for them. But too often they found themselves organized into "ladies' auxiliaries." In effect they did much of the work, while the men who ran the church got most of the credit. In the church as in the rest of society, a woman could make her mark, but it was against heavy odds. America was still distinctly a man's world. A few determined women. Because there were immigrant women to work as servants, middle-class women were freed from housework. At the same time, however, there were few employment opportunities for middle-class women. In colonial times some women had served as doctors and had spoken for themselves in court. But medical schools and law schools had made these occupations more professional. As doctors and lawyers formed their own societies, they set up strict new rules for entry. Some of these limited the practice of medicine and law to men. I'he teaching profession was open to women. But there were no schools where they could receive training equal to that of men teachers. A movement developed to improve educational opportunities for women. Catherine Beecher, Emma Willard, and Mary Lyon established seminaries for the education of girls. They hoped to train school teachers who would carry both learning and republican principles into every classroom. The writer Margaret Fuller thought that the idea of natural superiority of males was nonsense. "We would have every path laid open to women as freely as to men," she wrote. In 1847 a newspaper editor from New England reported, "I regret that the tide of immigration has thrown many of our [workers] out of employment . .'. and they tell me that it is the cause of these hard times." Behind the editors words was a startling fact. From 1845 Read here of how Irish and Germans poured into America. Their labor was needed. And they worked under terrible conditions. But they were not welcomed by all. to 1855, over 1,300,000 Irish and almost a million Germans poured into the country (graph on page 225). The Irish immigrants were fleeing the horrors of a famine. Potatoes were a mainstay of the Irish diet. With the failure of the potato crop during the "hungry forties" the number of deaths from starvation and disease soared into the millions. Millions more bundled together their few belongings and fled to the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia, or anywhere else that they could g°- Many German immigrants to the United States were running away from famine ttxt, for the 1840s were a time of crop failures in much of western Europe. But some Germans left home for political reasons. Most had a little money. They were able to provide themselves with a few small comforts, even in their flight from hunger. They were also able to travel beyond the eastern seaboard to the Old 219 VHIlUBLir cirrartrn Northwest. There, somt took up the "worn out" land American farmers had abandoned. Others were able to start small businesses. Cheap labor. The Irish were almost without assets. For centuries English landlords had taken most of what Ireland produced. Now the Irish lacketl even the necessities of life. In 1847 a Boston newspaper reported the arrival of Irish immigrants "so weak . . . that many of them could with difficulty crawl on shore." They carried with them terrible memories of what the famine had done to their homeland. The Irish were truly desperate. Often the families they had left behind were depending on them for any help they could send back. So they poured into the cities of the eastern United States ready to take any job they were offered. Many Americans were hostile to the Irish because of social problems. Crime and disease are always worst in the slums, and that was where Irish immigrants had to live. But if the Irish had to do the meanest jobs, these were nevertheless essential jobs. They dug the sewers, laid the rails, and carried burdens where even pack animals could not go. They were a huge reservoir of cheap labor ready to be exploited by profit- seeking businessmen. The booming factories drew them like magnets. Low wages, long hours. Before the 1840s, American factory workers had generally been people born in this country. Usually they were driven into the factories by necessity. Many were young farm boys and girls who worked to add a few dollars to the family income. In Massachusetts and Rhode Island Fresh air on deck, a rare luxury on crowded immigrant ships. factories about half of all textile workers were children. After the mid-1800s some changes were noticeable. The number of children dropped to about 8 per cent. At the same time the proportion of women rose to almost half the total. And more and more of the workers were immigrants. The hours of factory work in the years before the Civil War remained long and the wages low. The average work week ran from sixty to 72 hours. In summer the work day was from sunrise to sunset. Winter work days lasted until nine o'clock. Wages were 25 cents a day for children and ninety cents a day for men. Women were paid forty cents daily. "The oppressed in our midst." With the long hours and low pay went unbelievable working conditions. Children who fell asleep over their work were whipped. Factories were like prisons, and the workers were no better off than slaves. An editorial in one labor paper said, "Let us not stretch our ears to catch the sound of the lash on the flesh of the oppressed black while the oppressed in our midst are crying out in thunder tones." In early factories there was little attention to health or safety. Workers had to eat their meals on the job, and few had any guarantee that they would receive the wages that they had earned. If an employer went bankrupt, creditors divided whatever he had, leaving nothing for the workers. When workers tried to form unions to improve their lives, they were sometimes prosecuted. English common law under which American courts worked made any such activity a conspiracy against the employer. Only in 1842 did a Massachusetts case, Commonwealth v. Hunt, declare it legal to organize a union. A shoe factory in 1854. Factory owners often had trouble getting workers. What was the advantage of hiring children? When a depression struck, the hard life of the factory hand became considerably worse. The reformer Orestes Brownson said that then the worker had "to go days without food; to [remain idle for] weeks, seeking work and finding none." The brightest prospect for the worker's family was a trip to the poorhouse. Respectable lives. Employers often did take a paternalistic interest in their workers. That is, they treated them like children. Their needs were taken care of, but they were given little independence or responsibility. Some employers built tenement houses for their workers. 221 The independent workingmen's parties attacked banks, corporations, and all forms of special privilege. They stressed the right of even,' person to follow his or her own self- interest as long as there was no interference with the rights of others. Some middle-class people also tried to improve working conditions and provide educational opportunities for the poor. They believed that educated workers were less likely to disrupt society than ignorant ones. And they applied pressure to soften the laws against indebtedness. As many as 75,000 people were put in prison for debt in 1829. "I don't know." Many of the working- men's organizations were really unions of small independent businessmen. They feared that a strong government would give privileges to some citizens, and they wanted equal opportunities for all. Others tried to protect native labor from the rising tide of immigrant workers. The newcomers were accused of holding down wages by working for next to nothing. Immigrants were also used by employers to break Strikes. On the political front antiforeign and ami-Catholic feeling led to the formation of the American Party. It sought to keep foreigners and Catholics from holding public office and demanded a 21-year residency rule for citizenship. The American Party was a half-secret organization. Its members were supposed to answer, "I don't know," when questioned about it. Thai led to their being called "Know-Nothings." Know- Nothingism reached a peak in 1853 and 1854. For a time it controlled the state legislature of Massachusetts, and in 1856 the party put up a candidate for President. Thereafter, it rapidly faded. Heavy immigration continued right into the first years of the twentieth century. Antiforeign feeling did not die out after the 1850s, but it no longer had an organized political voice. 1. Explain why there was so much opposition to immigrants, even though the country needed them, 2. Write a letter explaining the feelings of a German immigrant family about their new home. 3. Tell how a farm boy or girl might have felt about working in a textile mill. What would one probably dislike about it? Was anything about mill work better than farm work? Explain. Read here of how Cities grew by trade and manufacturing. But developed slums, crime, and disease Early railroads gave a rough ride. But drew the nation's sections together. In their hearts most Americans believed that in every way country life was superior to life in the city. Even as their urban centers grew and flourished throughout the 1800s, they clung to the view that there was something unnatural about urban life. The unquestioned virtue of the farmer and the pioneer was self-reliance. The careful planning and interdependence needed to keep a city functioning seemed the opposite of what was good and proper. The best route to the heart of the country. The growth of cities has always been taken as a sign of progress. It is the mark of a society moving from underdevelopment to maturity. While city growth was slow in the South, it moved rapidly in the rest of the country (graph on page 174). The proportion of city dwellers increased by 800 per cent between 1820 and 1840. In 1820 there were only twelve cities with populadons of more than 10,000. By I860 there were 101. Eight of those had more than 100,000 people. One, New York City, w'as well over the million mark. In the early 1800s most United States cities were on the seacoast, and their chief concern was trade. Merchants, who had been their leading citizens since colonial times, were mostly engaged in importing and exporting. But they also built their owrn ships and acted as their own bankers and insurance agents. In earlier times the merchant might operate a rum distillery, a rope factory, a flour mill, or a lumber-sup- ply business. After 1815, manufacturing operations grew larger and more complicated (pages 215-216). And the work of running them became more specialized. By 1860 trading had increased, but manufacturing was the chief activity in the older cities along the coast. For the newer ones of the interior, manufacturing was the main reason for their existence. The growing wealth of the interior meant greater prosperity for New York, Philadelphia, and Boston as they competed for trade. In this rivalry New York's lead was unchallengeable. The Hudson and Mohaw k valleys and the Great Lakes gave it the best route to the heart of the country' (maps on pages 172 and 228). But the West and the South were soon creating enough business for all the coastal cities. The worst slum. Cities could grow breathtakingly fast. Chicago had about 300 people in 1830. By 1860 it had 109,000. But such quick expansion caused deep problems. In 1820 a foreign visitor described New York as a city without "hovels . . . ruined garrets or dank and gloomy cellars filled with wrretched victims." In other words, it was a city without slums. By the middle of the century New York's slums, packed with immigrants, were notorious throughout the w'orld. No district anywhere had as bad a reputation as the Five Points in New' York City. It had been built on drained land to provide housing for the middle class. When the soft soil began to settle, its houses were abandoned and fell into disrepair. Then the poor moved in. Within a single building called The Brewery there was, on the average, a murder every single day. The New York police went into the Five Points only in platoon strength (ten to thirty men). In 1844 a newspaper editor wrote that the streets of the Five Points were clogged "with offal and filth" thrown from neighboring buildings. All this was mixed with "the usual deposits of mud and manure." The area was a frightening view of the worst level to which a city could descend. A rising death rate. Lack of sewers added to the unpleasantness ol city life. On the eve of the Civil War only a third of New York City had sewers, and they wrere not in the slum districts. Little was known about the causes of disease, and most cities had no health service. From 1H10 to 1859 the city death rate rose frighteningly. Voices were raised to demand reform and to improve the quality of life. By the late 1830s people were insisting on improvements in tenement construction. Some laws were passed, but they applied only to new buildings. Little was done about existing structures. And immigrants kept arriving to fill these rickety firetraps to overflowing. Just before the Civil War there were 29.000 New Yorkers living in the stinking cellars of old buildings. Crime was a steady product of the slums, and most of the lawbreakers were assumed to be immigrants. In 1844 New York created the first publicly supported police force. Other eastern cities soon followed. In the 1850s old-fashioned volunteer fire cotnpanies were replaced by paid firefighters. These w'ere the first small efforts of cities to get rid of their w'orst conditions. Real reform would not come until the late 1800s. 225 Backs in some parts of the South had to wear identification tags. A slave found away from his or her plantation would have to show the tag to any white challenger. Note that one tag identifies a free black. cm blacks were usually city-dwellers, free southern blacks might be found in either city or countryside. But in neither place were the lives of southern blacks very secure or very comfortable. Especially after Nat Turner's rebellion (page 247), harsh laws called black codes governed their lives. It was not easy for free blacks to own property, and their freedom of movement was severely restricted. In some places I there even were laws forcing each free black to have a white guardian. In many ways northern blacks were not I much better off. In the Northeast only Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, and Massachusetts allowed them to vote. And New York had special property qualifications just for blacks. In the western states it was even worse. Illinois, Indiana, and Oregon barred blacks from entering their territory, and until 1849 Ohio denied them the right to attend public schools or serve on juries. Ohio then set up a separate school system for blacks but spent little money on it. Northern blacks escaped the worst problem of their free brothers and sisters in the South. They didn't have to worry about keeping their liberty. Southern blacks who could not produce papers proving they were free might be clapped into chains. Even if they had such papers, they still might be carried off by kidnappers. In spite of all these handicaps there were free blacks, even in the South, who made a good living. Most farmed the land or worked as laborers in the towns. But many of them had bought their freedom by working at various skilled trades such as blacksmithing, carpentry, or shoemaking, for which they had been trained when they were slaves. These blacks were able to earn good livings as high-grade workmen. At least one of them, Thomas Day, a cabinetmaker of North Carolina, employed a white assistant. 1. Show (a) some ways in which all white southerners benefited from slavery and (b) some ways in which all white southerners were hurt by it. 2. Compare the lives of free blacks, before the Civil War, in the Northeast, the West, and the South. 3. Explain how some free blacks managed to earn good livings. 249 and by using federal, stale, and local boun- ties—payment to those who signed up. But militia were often poorly trained and led. Their officers were political appointees or were elected by the men they commanded. And sometimes the terms of service were very short. Starting in 1863 the Union made use of a draft. All men from 25 to 40 were eligible, but anyone called up could send a substitute or pay 300 dollars to avoid serving. The draft seemed unfair, and it was especially unpopular among the foreign-born Irish in New York and Germans in the West. There were draft riots in New York and in Wisconsin, but Irish and German units also served the Union with distinction throughout the war. In fact, the continual flow of immigrants was among the many advantages of the North. Nearly 800,000 entered the country during the war. Some served in the army, others did the farm and factory work of those who fought. The South started drafting men in 1862. However, there were a great many ways of getting out of serving—by holding political office or owning a few slaves, as well as by sending a substitute. Desertions in both armies were about 10 per cent. Some of these were by "bounty jumpers": men who enlisted over and over again under different names in order to collect the bounties offered. Women in the war. The Civil War brought women of the North and South out of their homes on a large scale. Medical and relief work was the area of greatest need and they rushed to fill it. Dorothea Dix was a national figure through her work for the insane (page 202). She was appointed superintendent of nurses for the Union army. In the North, however, most women helped the war effort through the Sanitary Commission. It was a private organization like the Red Cross. The Commission's work was to help care for sick and wounded soldiers and their families. Women like Clara Barton, who later founded the American Red Cross, Mary Ann Bickerdyke. Mary Livermore, and Jane Hoge served with the Commission. So did hundreds of others who showed great organizing and administrative talent. In the South there was no organization like the Sanitary Commission. But southern women ran farms and plantations and supervised hospitals. They helped the war Members of the Sanitary Commission faced great dangers while reducing the hardships of the battlefield and the army camp. All of these Americans were pushed to the edges of the nation's life. A prosperous society was developing in the United States, but they had little part in it. Instead, they continued and advanced their own black. Native American, or Spanish cultures. These gave each minority a hidden life that the white majority rarely noticed and rarely understood. As long as the rivers flow. Before the Civil War, thousands of easterners made the long trek westward to California and Oregon. They passed as quickly as they could over the open territory bctw'ecn the Missouri River and the Rocky Mountains. To them the sea of grass that seemed to stretch to the end of the world looked all but empty. Only herds of buffalo and antelope and occasional bands of Indians occupied it. The late 1800s were a bad time for American minorities. As we have seen, the states passed segregation, or "Jim Crow," laws that made black citizenship a mockery. In the same period the last organized resistance of Indian peoples was crushed, and they were penned in reservations. Finally, Mexican Americans of California and the Southwest lost lands they had held for a hundred years or more. Read here of how Plains Indians depended on the buffalo. They came to seek gold or land, and at first most of them setded in the northern part of California. The Mexican government had welcomed settlers from the United States. And after the Mexican War. the Californios (Spanish- speaking settlers) were glad to have them too. Tht1 Anglos paid good prices for betf and other products of the local ranches and farms. South of San Francisco, the land taken from Mexico remained Spanish-spea and kept its Spanish culture. Both Me* can Americans and Anglos had helped i draw up California's constitution | page 274), and until 1878 the state was btlmgvd (that is, it had two official languages- Spanish and English). Long court cases. As might be expected, the culture of California and the Southwest was changed most by the coming of the railroads. The Anglo population grew rapidly, and state government became less sympathetic to Mexican -Ameri- can citizens. Sometimes they were treated like outsiders in their own country. There was occasional violence too. in which both sides took the law into their own hands. By the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (pages 269-270) and the Gadsden Purchase (page 269), property rights of Mexican Americans were supposed to lx* respected. But often Anglo settlers were able to get the Mexican land deeds set aside. Sometimes the land in question had never been surveyed. Occasionally, too, the deeds dated back to the 1600s, and many records had been lost or destroyed. An additional problem was that much of the land was held on a community basis. When this painting of Market Plaza in San Antonio. Texas was made in 1879. Mexican population mas larger than that of Anglos. Individual families used small plots to grow food, while their cattle grazed on large open areas. Communal landholding grew out of American Indian traditions; there was no basis for it in the law' of the United States. Mexican Americans could not usually' prove ownership of the land they claimed except through long and expensive court cases. And the courts were those of the Anglo authorities. Once they had lost their land, Mexican Americans lost their standing, just as blacks and Indians had. sr 1. Describe the steps of United States policy by which the Indian people were driven to war. 2. Explain why the Dawes Act caused a decline in Indian landholding. 3. Tell how the railroads helped to change the character of California. Greeley, but it did them no good. At that time, die amount of government corruption was not generally known, and Grant was still popular. The Republicans won easily. The next election, in 1876, would be a different story. 1. Compare Ulysses S. Grant as a soldier and as a politician. What qualities does each job require? Which did he have? 2. Describe the work of Grant's good appointees. Much of the nation's prosperity in the late 1800s was based on railroad construction. Generous land grants and other government aid (page 356) cleared the way for construction of the first transcontinental railroad. In 1863 the Central Pacific began laying track eastward from Sacramento. The problem of getting enough laborers to build the railroad was solved by bringing in workers from China. The Union Pacific pushed westward from Omaha. Large numbers of Irish worked on the construction crew's. In May 1869 the Union Pacific joined the Central Pacific at Promontory Point. Utah. Other transcontinental lines were already being planned. The Southern Pacific was completed in 1882, and the Northern Pacific a year later (map on page 363). A few well-aimed blows (California's Governor Stanford missed with the first swing of his sledge) drove in this gold spike and joined the Central Pacific with the Union Pacific. The biggest businesses. The railroads were granted 131 million acres of land by the federal government and another 49 million acres by the states. This added up to more territory than the state of Texas. The roads sold most of the land they got, for a total of 435 million dollars. T hey kept more than 60 million dollars' worth for themselves. The Great Northern Railroad from Lake Superior to Puget Sound (map on page 363) was built without government help. James J. Hill completed it in 1890. But it's unlikely that the earlier roads would or could have been built without heavy government gifts. The lines, after all, had to cross hundreds of miles of plains and mountains where there was no one to buy tickets or receive freight. Large rail systems came into existence. They sometimes fought one another. But the government tried to regulate them. Employers fought the new movement with blacklists (page 222) and yellow-dog contracts (by which workers had to promise they would never join a union). But the Knights of Labor grew steadily. Then in 1885, the Grand Master Workman, Terence V. Powderly, called a strike against Jay Gould's Wabash Railroad. Gould (page 362) had tried to cut wages on the line; the Knights forced him to restore the cuts. It was an astonishing development. No one had ever beaten Gould before at anything. The Knights' membership shot from Frank Farrell, black member of the Knights of Labor, introduces Grand Master Workman Terence V. Powderly. 110,000 to 700,000 in a single year. In fan, it grew so fast that it soon got out of hand. Locals were calling unauthorized strikes that they couldn't possibly win and making the organization look bad. In May 1886 workers held nationwide demonstrations to demand an eight-hour day. At the rally in Haymarket Square. Chicago, someone threw a bornb at the police, killing seven of them. To this day no one knows who did it, but the police arrested eight radicals who were in or near the square that day. On no more evidence than that, four of the accused were hanged and the others imprisoned. Ahead of their time. The Knights of Labor were in favor of the eight-hour day, but they had nothing to do with the demonstrations or the bornb. Nevertheless, thev suffered from the bad public reaction to what had happened. Their numbers declined, and by 1900 they had just about disappeared. In many ways the Knights of Labor were ahead of their time. The late 1800s were a period of growing discrimination and segregation in North and South (page 339). Yet the Knights admitted blacks and women to full membership. They also took in and tried to help unskilled laborers. The older craft unions were interested only in those workers who were already the best off—and easiest to help. The unions of skilled workers had the strength to hang on through bad times as well as good. Their members could not easily be replaced if they went on strike, so those unions controlled the labor supply in their trades. Also, their members could afford to pay high dues and build up healthy treasuries. A conservative leader. The craft unions found a leader in Samuel Gompers. an The Nation Faces New Challenges at Century's End If American business was to grow, it would need more than money, machines, coal, and railroads. It would also need workers. These came from among the immigrants, millions of them, mostly from Europe, who poured into the country in the 1800s. This was the largest movement of people the world has ever seen. In those years, 35 million men, women, and children uprooted themselves and crossed the sea to the land of promise. Huddled masses. Business leaders welcomed the newcomers. They presided a plentiful supply of labor for industry and lots of customers for its products. Union leaders such as Terence V. I'owderly (page 372) and Samuel (Jumpers (page 372) were not so sure. They feared that the hordes of new workers were keeping down the wages of those already here. In 1883 Emma Lazarus w'rote a poem about the new Statue of Liberty in New York Harbor. (The enormous figure was a gift from the people of Trance for the nation's hundredth birthday.) Part of her poem reads: Finding a place for millions of new Americans, drawn to the nation's shores by Liberty's torch, was one of the challenges at century's end. Give me jour tired, your poor. Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free. The wretched refuse of your teeming shore. Send these, the homeless, tempest-tossed to me; I lift my lamp beside the golden door! But a growing number of Americans were beginning to think that much of the Old World's "refuse" was not good enough for the United States. In fact, by the time Emma Lazarus had written her poem. Congress had voted (in 1882) to bar criminals, insane people, and other "undesir- ables" from entry. And in the same year, it considered excluding one group of people, the Chinese. A hard-working people. China had had a long and glorious history. Those Americans who knew the country best argued that its people were thrifty, hardworking, and law-abiding. In every way, they would make model citizens. Hut too many .Americans preferred to see the Chinese as "a degraded race, ignorant of civilized life," as one magazine put it. To some former abolitionists, the Chinese immigrants even appeared to be part of a new slave trade. Their willingness to work long and hard for very little was looked upon as a threat to the living standards of white laborers. Anti-Chinese riots broke out in California in the 1870s. Not Read here of how New immigrants flooded the nation, j They came from southern and eastern Europe. indwere prepared to work hard. But some people wanted to keep them out. 1862 The Homestead Act is passed. 1869 The American Woman Suffrage and the National Woman Suffrage Associations are founded. 1873 The Treasury stops buying silver. 1878 The Bland-Allison Silver Purchase Act is passed. 1882 Congress bars "undesirables" from immigration. 1887 Electric streetcars appear first in Richmond. Virginia. 1889 Jane Addams founds Hull House. 1890 The Sherman Silver Purchase Act is passed. 1892 The Populists adopt their Omaha Platform. 1893 The Sherman Silver Purchase Act is repealed. 1896 The "free silver" election is fought. 1902 Chinese exclusion is made permanent. only conservative labor leaders like Samuel Gompers, but radical ones like Eugene Debs supported laws to keep the Chinese out. In 1882 Congress voted overwhelmingly to bar them for ten years. The law was renewed in 1892 and made permanent in 1902. And still they came. Meanwhile, Europeans continued by the thousands to brave the miseries of the steerage (the cheapest part of an immigrant ship, the one nearest the rudder). But the immigrants came, generally to lx- crowded into something almost as bad as the steerage, the dumbbell tenement (diagram above). These were designed to make use of every inch of space in a city block. Just as bad were the homes that had once belonged to the middle class and the rich. These downtown dwellings were divided into apartments, sometimes with one large family in every room. In most cases, the newcomers were also drawn into some kind of grinding, underpaid work. Often they were introduced to it by fellow countrymen who had arrived earlier and learned the ropes. And still they came. By the 1880s, over half a million a year came. In the 1900s this number increased. From 1905 to 1914 it averaged a million a year. A preferred group. Before 1890, each ten-year census had shown the location of the frontier line. The 1890 report declared that the line no longer existed. The frontier was officially closed. That fact w-ould haw been reason enough to begin limiting the number of immigrants. But at the time, debate on the issue was not over how man) people were to be admitted. Instead, it was concerned with where those people were to come from. Until the 1890s most immigrants came from the countries of northern and western Europe (Great Britain, Germany, Scandinavia). But in the 1880s a shift began. By 1890 most were from southern and eastern Europe (Italy, Austria-Hungary, Russia, the Balkans). Immigrants from northern supporting the literacy bill. He said that "the maintenance of the nation depended on the maintenance of racial purity and strength." Only willingness to work. President Grover Cleveland disagreed with Gotnpers and Lodge and the demand that immigration be limited. He vetoed the literacy bill, with a strongly worded message: "A century's stupendous growth, largely due to the assimilation and thrift of sturdy and patriotic adopted citizens," he said, "attests to the success of this generous and free- handed policy [of unlimited entry] which [demands] from our immigrants only physical and moral soundness and a willingness and ability to work." For the moment, the gates of the United States were open to all except the Chinese. But the victory was not permanent. This was only the first battle. Twenty years later, others too lost out. and western Europe had seemed foreign enough when they made up practically all of the arrivals. And they had often been treated badly. Now they were preferred. A bill to test immigrants for their ability to read and write was introduced in Congress in 1896. The sponsor of this liter- act' bill was Henry Cabot Lodge, a Massachusetts blucblood. He freely admitted that it was planned to "fall most heavily upon Italians, Russians. Poles. Hungarians, and Asiatics." Lodge referred to them as "races with which the English-speaking people have never hitherto assimilated, and who are most alien to the great body of the people of the United States." The labor leader Samuel Gompers I agreed. In 1897 he committed the AFI. to An 1893 cartoon shows prosperous Americans— shadowed by their former immigrant and pioneer selves—rejecting a "new'' immigrant. 1. Compare the experience of the "new" immigrants with that of the "old" ones (pages 219-223). Were the new immigrants better or worse off? Why? 2. Write a letter that might have been sent to the old country by a newly arrived immigrant. Tell about the voyage and about life in the New World. The immigrants who came to the United States in the late 1800s spread out over the land. Some became lumberjacks in northern Maine, or copper miners in Montana, or farmers on the prairie. But most went where so many others at that time were going—into the biggest cities. In the late 1800s the total population of the earth increased by 37 per cent. The population of the world's cities went up over 200 per cent In 1900 eleven cities in the world had over a million people. Three of them were in the United States: New York (five million), Chicago (two million), and Philadelphia (one and a half million), In 1910 less than 8 per cent of the rural population of the United States was born outside the country; in the eight largest cities, more than 30 per cent. Stretching the radius. Creating livable conditions for millions of new city-dwellers was a staggering problem. In 1890 only 629 of Chicago's 2,048 miles of streets were paved. Street lighting, pure water, and sewage disposal had to be provided on a massive scale. The city of the early 1800s was a "walking city." Laborers and business people lived within walking distance of the places where they worked. Few cities could expand beyond a radius of one or two miles. In the late 1800s the modern "com- muter city" had appeared. It began with the horse-drawn streetcar and the steam- powered "elevated railway." That noisy marvel was introduced in New York in 1870. Cable cars began moving up and dowm San Francisco's steep hills in 1873. Starting in Richmond, Virginia, in 1887, electric streetcars made their appearance almost everywhere during the next ten years. The first subway was opened in Boston in 1895. With all these improvements, cities could now spread out to a radius of five or ten miles. Read here of how Cities grew rapidly in the late 1800s. Services and living space were problems. A new kind of political leader appeared. And religious groups took on new roles. political question. Some cities built their own gas and water works; others gave out franchises, These were licenses to run streetcar lines and install lighting. Either way, there was plenty of room for political corruption. No melting pot. An ever-present problem in the new cities was how to keep them from breaking apart. In Chicago, Boston. New York, and—a little later—Detroit, there was a variety of people that could be found nowhere else in the world. German town-dwellers, Irish and Italian laborers. Portuguese sailors, migrants from the southern part of the United States, and Jewish refugees from the persecutions of the Russian Czar were all thrown together in American cities. There was a theory that in time these people would blend into something new Plenty of corruption. It was mostly middle-class families that took advantage of the new streetcar and elevated lines. They could now move to the suburbs and build larger, more modern houses—and escape the hordes of immigrants filling the downtown neighborhoods. The population of the suburbs swelled with city people. Often. in this period, outlying communities voted to join their bigger neighbors, thus expanding the city limits. Should the new city services (water, sewage, street lighting, and public transportation) be run by private business for profit? Or should they be owned by the city government? This became a burning The first elevated train in New York frightened I horses and fascinated people. How did such rapid I transit systems affect city life? and unique—ihe American. It was the theory of the melting pot, but in practice it seemed not to work that way. For sheer surv ival in their new and frightening surroundings immigrants had to flock together with their own kind. Each nationality had its separate section of the city. Today the sections would be called "ethnic neighbor- hoods." They were the Little Italys and Little Russias, the Germantowns and Ghinatowns, into which the cities divided. From the days of Jefferson. No public welfare agencies and almost no private charities aided the newcomers. What hdp they got came from their churches or the local political machine and its head, the political boss or ward boss. In New York City the local Democratic machine was Tammany Hall, a club dating back to the days of Thomas Jefferson. As early as the I8(>0s it was welcoming and helping—and using—the immigrants. When no one else would, the Tammany machine gave them jobs, handouts, legal advice, and friendship. All it asked in return was their votes. With those it was able to elect its candidates to local offices and use the city treasury as it pleased. In one city after another, political machines grew up. In the larger places each neighborhood had its precinct leader and each district its ward boss. They traded the votes of their loyal followers for political favors for themselves and their friends. In New York in the early 1870s, the system got badly out of hand. There the head of Tammany Hall, the boss of bosses, was William Marcy Tweed. He and his henchmen made up the Tweed Ring. George Bellow's painting Cliff Dwellers shows a crowded street in the tenement district of Ne* York City. What caused these conditions? Among other pieces of skullduggery, they built a horrible-looking New York County Courthouse. No one knows for sure how much it cost. But one way or another, the Tweed Ring helped itself to millions of dollars. Worse than Tweed. The business people of New York finally realized that it was their money the Tweed Ring was stealing. They backed Samuel Tilden, a shrewd and ruthless railroad lawyer. He prosecuted the members of the Tweed Ring and put it out of business. Boss Tweed spent the rest of his life in court and prison or running away from the law. Samuel Tilden, a Democrat, went on to become the reform governor of New York and a candidate for President in 1876 (page 341). Corruption in New York was by no means ended. There, and in every other rity with a large immigrant population, the system went on. Boss Tweed was succeeded by "Honest John" Kelly in 1871. But Richard Croker re-established the Tammany system in 1886. Some thought he was far worse than Tweed. I In Chicago. Mayor Carter Harrison kept power by paying careful attention to the problems of immigrant voters. In Boston and other places, the bosses ran representatives of the immigrant population for office. Hugh O'Brien and Patrick Collins, both mayors of Boston, were such men. A crude welfare state. One scene from I the days of the political bosses has often been described. 'The ward boss sits, as he I does every day, in his clubhouse headquar- I ters. One poor man or woman after an- I other comes forward haltingly to whisper I some tale of family trouble. T he boss listens I sympathetically and asks a few shrewd I questions. Then he passes something across The "Tammany Bank." A politician is seated on a throne like chair. When a coin is placed in his out stretched hand, he deposits it in his pocket. the table. It may be a bit of money. Or it may lx- a note to some city foreman telling him to put the petitioner on the payroll, or an order for a bag of coal or a basket of groceries. Who cares if the money was gotten by graft, the job already has three people doing the work of one, the coal is from the city yards, or the food w'as bought for the county hospital? Not the poor immigrant. He or she leaves the clubhouse, calling the blessings of heaven down upon the cigar- chewing boss. By operating in this way, trying to please as many people as possible, bosses held the cities together. They gave the new* citizens experience in politics and in working together for common goals. But they 383 gave the reformers fits. Those good people were shocked at the cost. Nevertheless, when Boss Tweed died in 1878, one of the papers confessed, "The bulk of the poor voters of this city revere his memory." The boss had run a crude welfare state. The gap between rich and poor. The only other institutions that seemed to care at all for the urban poor were the churches. Protestants saw the city as a new mission field like the old frontier. They carried to it both a gospel message and direct material help. The help might be given through skid-row missions such as those of the Salvation Army or large settlement houses able to serve women and children. Jane Addams founded the first of these in Chicago in 1889. At the same time, inner-city ministers were saying that it was not enough for Christian business people to lead upright lives and go to church. They must also pay their workers a living wage and allow them to join unions. In 1885 the Central Conference of American Rabbis adopted a declaration of principles. It concluded that society must work to bridge the gap between rich and poor. This "Pittsburgh Platform" started the social justice movement of American Reform Judaism. The heart of the people. At about the same time. Catholic Archbishop James Gibbons of Baltimore spoke up for the Knights of Labor (page 371). He told the leaders of the American Catholic Church that the Knights were working for the good of the city poor. If they were condemned, he said, "the Catholic Church might lose the heart of the people." A few years after Archbishop Gibbons made his statement. Pope Leo XIII spoke out in favor of labor and the right of workers to organize. From all these movements and ideas came something called the social gospel. It stressed that religion and religious leaders must try to improve the living conditions of workers, not just prepare them for the next world. As the ordained minister and Socialist leader Norman Thomas said, "Man does not live by bread alone, but he does live by bread." 1. Tell how a "walking city" differed from a "commuter city." What caused commuter cities to develop? 2. Write some questions you would want a political boss to answer if you were a newspaper reporter. 3. Explain the social gospel. "I want new experiences," wrote Louisa May Alcott in her diary. The year was 1862, and the New England writer was about to start work as a nurse in a Washington, D.C., army hospital. She also wrote that her trip to the capital was "a mast interesting journey into a new world full of stirring sights and sounds, new adventures, and an ever-growing sense of the great task 1 have undertaken." Many women were equally enthusiastic about occupations opened to them during the Civil War years (pages 318 320). With men going off to fight, some turned to nursing, teaching, charity work, even to businesses and jobs in offices. ships. Only one American was killed and one wounded. Deadly disease. Two weeks later, all Spanish forces in Cuba surrendered. Then, on July 25, Puerto Rico fell alter slight resistance. The United States had won complete control of the Caribbean at a cost of fewer than 400 deaths in battle. But ten times as many troops were killed by yellow fever and dysentery as by Spanish guns. Unlike the Navy, the United States Army had been very' badly prepared for the war. It lacked the medical supplies, training, and even the uniforms needed to fight in the tropics. A longer and dirtier war. Meanwhile, at Manila, Commodore Dewey had been waiting for land troops that could take the city. In July they arrived, and in mid-Au- gust 10,000 Americans, supported by a force of Filipino guerrillas, landed and seized the capital of the Philippines. Trouble broke out almost at once. Emilio Aguinaldo (ahg-ee-NAHL-doh), the Filipino leader, believed the Americans had promised his people independence. The United States commander denied this. When Spain signed the Treaty of Paris, giving most of what was left of her empire to the United States, the Philippines were part of the package. Aguinaldo cried that he had been betrayed, and in May 1899 again raised the flag of revolt. This time it was not against the Spaniards but against the American liberators. The people of the United States thought their forces had been fighting a splendid little war to free the Cubans. Quite unexpectedly, they' found their army bogged down in a longer and dirtier war to conquer the Filipinos. The road to empire. In the two years of bitter fighting that followed, 400 Americans and over 200,000 Filipinos lost their lives. Sixty thousand United States troops seemed unable to control more than the cities. The countryside belonged to Aguinaldo's forces and their supporters. As usually happens in guerrilla warfare, both sides committed atrocities. Each one led to a savage response. Men, women, and children were slaughtered, and soon the United States was operating concentration camps like those of "Butcher" Weyler. Slowly the army beat down resistance. It shot one prisoner for every American killed, executed any Filipino thought to be helping the guerrillas, destroyed homes and crops. Finally, Aguinaldo was captured in March 1901. The Philippine Insurrection ended the next year. "The white man's burden." Back home some Americans were bewildered by the takeover of these distant islands. It seemed to be against every thing the United States had stood for. Others, however, were more than willing to follow the English imperialist style described by poet Rudyard Kipling and "take up the white man's burden" of ruling over "lesser breeds." Theodore Roosevelt, the hero of San Juan Hill, told the .American people that they must accept the burden. The Filipinos, he said, were not ready for self-gov- ernment. In 1900 Roosevelt ran for Vice President with McKinley, on a Republican ticket supporting imperialism. Against them was William Jennings Bryan, who gambled on the country 's turning its back on the overseas adventurers. But Bryan was beaten by a bigger margin than in 1896 (page 397). Even the arguments of those against imperialism sounded racist. They talked of the Filipinos as "our little brown brothers." The liberal Republican — and immi- grant—Carl Schurz proclaimed, "As first- class citizens with full civil rights Filipinos which Japan promised not to interfere in the Philippines, and the United States recognized that Japan had special interests in Korea. Since Korea had long been attached to China, the agreement was clearly against the Open Door Policy. But TR realized that the Open Door was mostly bluff. Privately he told his good friend Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts that the policy completely disappeared "as soon as any powerful nation determined to disregard it. . . A Gentlemen's Agreement. Besides the Treaty of Portsmouth, Japan had another reason for being upset with the United Slates. Since the 1890s, America's West Coast had been attracting Japanese laborers. Whites in California became alarmed, as they had been a generation earlier by Chinese immigrants. T hen, following the San Francisco earthquake of 1906, the city school board set up a separate, segregated school for Oriental children. Of course, this was a local matter over which the federal government had no control. But public opinion in Japan was outraged, and the Japanese government soon let Washington know it. President Roosevelt moved into the muddle with his usual vigor. First, he per- maded the San Francisco school board to [withdraw its plan to segregate Oriental children. Second, he got the Japanese government to promise that it would no longer allow its people to emigrate to the United States as laborers. Since nothing was formally signed by the two governments, the arrangement was called the "Gentlemen's Agreement." For a time the crisis was eased. The following year a "great white fleet" of American warships made a round-the-world lise. On arriving in Japan, the fleet was greeted with friendly enthusiasm. Such a display of America's might was typical Theodore Roosevelt showmanship. He wanted others to accept the United States as a leader among the nations of the world. "When we shake hands, we shake the world." United States interests in Europe were not as pressing as those in Asia. Nevertheless, TR made important diplomatic moves there too. In 1905 a crisis rose between France and Germany over Morocco. Germany's ruler, Kaiser Wilhelm II, called for an international conference at Algeciras (al-juh-SEE-ras), a Spanish town on the Strait of Gibraltar. The Kaiser asked the American President to persuade the French to attend. Because a general European war would be dangerous for the United States, Roosevelt agreed. United States representatives also helped to work out a solution and convinced the Germans to accept it. The United States role was not a large one, but it was a change for the United States to concern itself with strictly European affairs. A few years later, when TR finished his term of office, he went on a grand tour of Europe (page 414). While he was visiting Germany, the ex-President and the Kaiser were photographed on horseback at a military review. Across one of the prints Wilhelm scrawled, "Roosevelt, when we shake hands, we shake the world." He may have been right. Explain why the United States behaved differently in all of these circumstances: 1. In the Caribbean and the Far East. 2. Towards China and Japan. 3. With Europe and with Latin America. became the first woman elected to Congress. She attracted nationwide attention when she voted against the declaration of war. But perhaps the most important development was that the women's role in the war effort built enough popular support to win ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, which gave women the vote in 1920 (page 421). As in the Civil War, women began to fill the jobs formerly closed to them. They worked in airplane factories and even put down railroad track. Yet to a great extent the gains were only temporary. In fact, by 1920 only 800,000 more women were at work than in 1910. And many of the jobs women kept after the war were not the kind that paid well. For example, many became elevator operators and theater ushers. On the other hand, openings doubled and tripled in some occupations in which women had already gained a foothold before the war— library and social work, for example, and college teaching. Population shifts. Many blacks had left the South before the war. They had hoped to escape discrimination and find worthwhile employment. The demand for labor during World War I speeded black migration northward. Between 1916 and 1920 an estimated 500,000 blacks moved North, settling in the big cities, close to the factories. Chicago's black population grew by 50.000 between 1916 and 1920; Detroit's, by 600 per cent from 1910 to 1920. The black migration brought changes in race relations in the North. As blacks competed with whites for jobs and housing, racial tensions increased. Soon, the tensions exploded into ugly race riots. The bloodiest look place in East St. Louis, Illinois. There, one day in 1917, a rumor started that a black man had killed a white; and 3,000 whites stormed into the black community. The mob beat every black person in sight. White men set a group of rundown houses on fire and shot the black residents as they ran from the flames. The National Guard was called in but it failed to restore order. Many of the guardsmen had no sympathy for the blacks. Some 6,000 terrified blacks were forced to flee the city. And when the sickening affair ended, no one was sure how many had been killed. A Congressional committee put the figure at 39; the NAACP estimated that it was between 100 and 200. Black soldiers earned respect on the battlefield; at home they met prejudice and discrimination. A stone wall of discrimination. Although the East St. Louis riot was the worst, it was by no means the only episode of violence. In all, 39 major race riots took place during World War I. Blacks coming North did find jobs and better pay. They did not escape prejudice and persecution. Blacks served with distinction in the military. Eventually, 367,000 entered the armed forces, and by the war's end 100,000 were overseas. But a stone wall of discrimination ran through the military. The Marine Corps barred blacks entirely. The navy accepted them only as cooks and stewards. At first the army refused to make blacks officers. Eventually, it dropped this rule, and in October 1917 over six hundred black captains and lieutenants were commissioned. Still, blacks enthusiastically supported the war. An article in a black newspaper was entitled "Close Ranks." It appealed for united support of the war effort and argued that black patriotism would help to end segregation after the war. For all their exclusions from "white America," black citizens were ready to come to its defense in Wilson's war. "Liberty cabbage." Popular backing for the war was a question which deeply concerned Wilson. Less than a week after war was declared, he set up the Committee on Public Information headed by George Creel. Creel's committee sponsored lectures, motion pictures, pamphlets, and posters with rousing, patriotic themes. Film stars and public figures staged rallies to encourage the public to buy Liberty Bonds, the chief means of financing the war. The Committee's campaign picked up the themes of the earlier Allied propaganda (page 451). The German enemy was portrayed as a savage beast ready to demolish civilization. The Creel Committee did its job well— too well, in fact. A wave of intolerance swept the country. Those citizens not totally behind the war effort became the targets of "superpatriots." Individuals who did not buy Liberty Bonds were insulted and sometimes attacked. Some cities passed ordinances forbidding anyone to say anything bad about the United States. Many German-Amcricans were suspected of being disloyal to the cause or of being spies. Schools forbade the teaching of the German language. Sauerkraut was renamed "liberty cabbage," the dachshund became the "liberty pup," and hamburger was referred to as Salisbury steak. The bounds ovestepped. Creel reported that Wilson had told him that freedom of speech in wartime was "insanity,'' and the move to silence dissent began. Under the Espionage Law of 1917 and the Sedition Law of 1918, people were jailed for criticizing the government, and many newspapers and magazines were banned from the mails. The government, clearly, overstepped the bounds of common sense. Unfortunately, much of the damage could not be undone. Even after the war Americans sometimes hesitated before exercising their constitutional right to criticize government actions and policies. Wr TRY THIS! Compare the part played by each of these in World War I and the American Civil War 1. Industry (page 301). 2. Naval power (page 305). 3. Black Americans (pages 307-309). 4. Women (pages 318-319). The second Russian Revolution of 1917 (page 463) and Communist uprisings in eastern European countries stirred up fear that communism was on the march. So did a Soviet propaganda campaign directed at other nations of the world. And a number of Socialists and other radicals in the United States were inspired by the successful Russian Revolution. They joined together to form the American Communist Party. All this alarmed the country's political conservatives—persons who distrusted abrupt change and who tended toward preserving traditional ways. They thought that a revolution was about to break out and that the government might soon be overthrown by violent means. Real grievances ignored. A wave of strikes swept the country in 1919. Many thought it meant the approach of an uprising. Steelworkers, paid 28 dollars for a seven-day work week, left the mills. In Seattle, Washington, a general strike all but closed down the city. Coal miners — 394.000 of them —climbed out of the pits. Policemen in Boston, Massachusetts, refused to go on duty. None of this labor activity was the result of secret orders from Moscow. The strikes occurred because in industry after industry wages were low and hours of work were long. Since 1914, prices had soared by Read here of how The nation failed to help its workers. It even deported some of them. And executed two Italian immigrants. 1915 The Ku Klux Klan is reorganized. 1917 A literacy test for immigrants is adopted. 1919 Race riots break out in northern cities. 1920 Marcus Garvey's Universal Negro Improvement Association meets in New York. 1920 Warren Harding is elected President. 1923 Harding dies. Calvin Coolidge becomes President. 1924 The Teapot Dome scandal erupts. 1924 The National Origins Act is adopted. 102 per cent and workers could not keep pace. But many Americans chose to ignore the real grievances of labor. Instead, they were convinced, as one newspaper wrote. Socialists, Communists, and labor leaders were "joining together with the object of overt hrow'ing the American government and establishing a Bolshevist republic." In the same year of 1919, terrorist bornbings fanned the fires of what had become a Red Scare. The postman handed a maid at a Georgia senator's home a small package; it exploded, destroying both her hands. Next day the New York Post Office discovered sixteen similar packages containing bornbs; they had been addressed to such well-known people as J. P. Morgan and John D. Rockefeller of Standard Oil fame (page 369). One bornb went off outside the home of the United States Attorney General, A. Mitchell Palmer. Others exploded in front of public buildings. None of the terrorists was ever caught. in 1915 by William J. Simmons on Stone Mountain in Georgia. Like the Klan of Reconstruction times (page 340), the members wore hooded sheets and called themselves protectors of white supremacy. But the new Klan had other goals as well. It attacked Jews as business manipulators, Catholics as a threat to Protestantism, the ' Wets" (opponents of Prohibition) as lawbreakers, and immigrants as an "alien" clement in American society. By 1920 the Klan was using modern advertising techniques, and its membership was mushrooming across the country. Between four and five million joined up and wore the white robe. Why did so many people become Klansmen? The frustration with modern life was one answer. People with rural or small-town backgrounds sensed that their way of life was disappearing. Somehow, they imagined, the Klan would stem the tide of change. It would protect them from the sin and foreign faces of the city. In the early 1920s the Klan had a powerful influence. Rallies and marches were commonplace. Catholic churches were burned. A Klansman murdered a priest and went scot-free. The Democrats' 1924 convention swarmed wnth Klansmen. In Indiana, Klan leader D.C. Stephenson controlled state politics, ran the legislature, and told the governor what to do. The Klan declined as quickly as il had erupted. When, in 1925, Indiana leader Stephenson was convicted of murdering a young secretary, members felt betrayed and left the organization in droves. By John Steuart Curry, Baptism in Kansas. In a time of change, everyone did not adopt the new morality. 1930 only 9,000 Klansmcn were left and in 1944 the Klan was formally disbanded. Slamming the dcx"r. Though the Klan dwindled, the fear of foreigners did not. During the 1920s severe restrictions were placed on immigration. In 1917 a literacy test act (page 397) had been passed over President Wilson's veto. It required immigrants to prove that they could read English or another language before being admitted. Then, during the 1920s, further restrictions were adopted. President Harding signed the Emergency Quota Act of 1921. It was followed by the National Origins Act of 1924. The intent of both laws was the same. They strictly limited the number of immigrants to be admitted each year (150,000 finally). And they gave each European nation a quota. The quotas were based on the number of people in the United States who could trace their origins to the particular country. As this worked out. the Act gave generous allowances to the countries of northern and western Europe. Those in eastern and southern Europe got very small quotas. People from the Western Hemisphere were admitted in large numbers, but Asiatics were barred altogether. The effect was immediate. The "Golden Dtxir" was slammed shut, and immigration fell to a trickle. It was an act of racism, reflecting the belief that Italians. Cireeks, Russian Jews, and all Orientals were unworthy of becoming Americans. 1. Tell how The Great Gatsby reflected the attitudes of the 1920s. 2. Write a conversa tion between two Klan members, one from Reconstruction days and one from the 1920s. Would they approve of one another's activities? 3. Explain how the National Origins Act was "racist." 5. THE BLACK EXPERIENCE IN THE 1920s While farmers and immigrants felt left out of American life in the 1920s, blacks continued to be as cut off as they had always been. By the 1920s every' major northern city had a black ghetto. Last hired, first fired. The largest and best-known black community in the United States was New York's Harlem. It had been a quiet middle-class area until the turn of the century. Then overbuilding caused real estate values to collapse. Enterprising black business people leased empty buildings from white owners and re-leased them to black tenants. Slums grew up in Harlem and other black sections. As surrounding white neighborhoods resisted black expansion, and as southern blacks continued to move north, the population grew ever denser. Rents rose, and because most blacks were poorly paid, they took in lodgers to make ends meet. By the mid-1920s the majority of urban blacks lived in neighlxtrhixxls marked Read here of how Blacks moved into northern cities. And found more militant leaders. Black artists gained recognition. In September 1932 a Los Angeles grocery' store advertised these prices in a local newspaper: Bread, 1 lb.loaf 5c Lettuce, per head 1C Oranges, 3 doz. 10c Sliced bacon, per lb. 10c Spring lamb chops, per lb. 12l/^c The items were not on sale. The prices were typical at the time. With prices so ridiculously low, some farmers did not even try to sell their crops. Instead, they slaughtered livestock, dumped milk, destroyed fruit and vegetables, and used corn as fuel for their stoves. It often seemed pointless to harvest crops at all. A whole wagonload of oats would not bring in enough money for a farmer to buy a pair of shoes—at four dollars a pair. "My sister's day to eat." Even with low prices, many people could not afford to buy food. In 1932 those lucky enough to have jobs earned, on the average, S16.21 a week. A quarter of the workforce could not claim even this meager amount—they were unemployed. Private and public charities tried to meet the crisis by setting up free soup kitchens and bread lines. But there was simply not enough soup and bread to go around. It was not uncommon to see desperate men and women searching for scraps of food in garbage cans and city- dumps. Children were perhaps the most tragic victims of the depression. Twenty per cent of the students in the New York City school system suffered from malnutrition in 1932. In another town, a teacher told a sick-look- ing girl to go home and get something to eat. "I can't," the girl replied. "This is my sister's day to eat." Cutbacks. The depression was felt in nearly every home in the United States. Millions of people had to change their way of living. People saved money in every way they could. They reused razorblades. returned pop bottles for the two cent deposit, and bought day-old bread. Parents' clothes were cut down to fit children. Through it all, those who had once belonged to the prosperous middle class struggled to "keep up appearances." But for blacks, Mexican Americans, other minorities, and many women, survival itself was the problem. In 1934 there were 75,000 homeless, single women in New York City alone. They spent their days looking for work and their nights riding the subways. It was a rough life. If they were over 35, it was even rougher, as many companies would not even consider hiring them. Throughout the 1930s, 20 per cent of the female workforce was unemployed. Blacks and Mexicans need not apply. During the prosperous 1920s, large numbers of Mexicans crossed the border hoping to find better-paying jobs in the United States. When the depression set in. those Read here of how Prices fell so low that farmers destroyed crops. At the same time, people were starving. Films and radio offered escape. But some novels attacked capitalism. Mexicans were hit hard. The few jobs open usually went to native-lx>m Anglos. United States border officials tried to keep the Mexicans out. often by violence. During the depression, an estimated 500.000 Mexicans were deported for illegal entry. Even some who had become United States citizens were thrown out of the country. But the Mexicans continued to enter until, by 1940. there were two and a half million living in the United States. This was a half million more than in 1950. For blacks the struggle against racism and poverty continued. Those who left the rural South to look for work in cities found the few jobs there going to whites. Sometimes, blacks could expect nothing from the local charities. One relief agency in Houston, Texas, posted a sign that read: "Appli- cations are not being taken from unemployed Mexican or colored families. They are being asked to shift for themselves." Happy endings. Oddly enough, some businesses Ixxmted during the depression. Promoters of cheap family entertainment, such as miniature golf, made fortunes in the thirties. The biggest moneymaker was the motion picture industry. With the price of admission seldom more than thirty cents, even the unemployed could afford a few hours in the local "picture palace." To meet the enormous demand, studios were , churning out one film after another. For Hollywood, it was a golden age. Occasionally, the movies of the thirties [showed the hardship of the depression. In / \m a Fugitive from a Cham Gang, actor Paul Muni played an ex-soldier crushed by an uncaring and corrupt society. This agreement was hailed by many Europeans as having prevented war. A night of broken glass. With the Munich settlement, the United States too hoped that war had been avoided. But Hitler's anti-Jcwish policies caused many Americans to feel deep concern. Among the first acts of Hitler after he came to power in 1933 was the passage of laws denying German Jews police and lc- tal protection. The Nazi intention was to drive the Jews out of Germany. Any who did leave the country had to give up all their property. The situation of the Jews took a sharp turn for the worse in November 1938. A young German Jew ish refugee shot a tier- man diplomat in Paris. In revenge, Hitler authorized a savage attack on the Jews still living in Germany. Thousands were arrested, while in one night organized rioters burned and wrecked Jewish synagogues, homes, and businesses. The climax of what became known as the "night of broken glass" was a fine of 400 million dollars levied against the Jews of Germany. People in the United States were shocked. But the nation continued to apply the quota system to Jewish immigrants (page 488). As a result, only 75.000 German Jews wrcrc able to enter the United States between 1933 and 1941. Between 1941 and 1945, the federal government spent more than 320 billion dollars to finance the war. The money was obtained through the sale of war bonds to banks, corporations, public institutions, and private citizens, and through heavy taxation. To keep citizens up to date in their tax payments, a payroll withholding plan was adopted. Beginning on July 1. 1943, income taxes were deducted from the wage earners' pay lx.1 fore they received it A spending spree. The war effort touched nearly every aspect of life and finally solved the problem of the depression. Vast federal expenditures brought full employment at last. Incomes rose throughout the country. Job opportunities drew people to the booming industries of the North and East and to the new manufacturing centers of California and the Southwest. Whether Americans thought about the future or not, their bank accounts steadily grew. Between 1941 and the end of 1944. individual savings increased from 50 billion dollars to an unheard-of 140 billion. The makings of a vast postwar spending spree existed. The war had revealed how much the United States economy could produce. People would expect a high level of production when peace came. A loyal party member. One of the more remarkable aspects of United States politics has been the people's determination to let nothing interfere with elections for Congress and the Presidency. In the elections of 1942, Republicans gained enough seats in Congress to give them, with conservative southern Democrats (page After Pearl Harbor, Japanese-Americans march to internment camps under armed guard. They were held until 1945. On the West Coast 126.000 of them lost homes, farms, and businesses. More jobs brought more money to spend. Before the war, the average American ate fifty pounds of meat a year. A decade later the typical citizen was eating 150 pounds yearly. For generations, hand-me- down clothes had been a part of growing up. In the 1950s this changed. Each year girls between fourteen and sixteen spent 773 million dollars on clothes. And "every- one" seemed to be buying cars. The number of automobiles registered increased by 135 per cent between 1945 and 1960. Americans were only 6 per cent of the globe's population. But they were producing and consuming over a third of all the world's goods and services. The not-so-affluent. In the 1950s those who worked hard and did their jobs well had every chance of getting ahead—if they were white. Most blacks, Mexican Americans, and American Indians were left out of the affluent society. They seldom got the education they needed for good jobs. Those who did found that few employers would hire them. Forty to fifty million Americans were stuck in the misery of the slums. By 1960 a full 40 per cent of the women in the United States—more than ever be- fore—had jobs. Often looked upon as temporary workers, they were seldom promoted to positions of responsibility. And they received lower wages than men. For most women, a career just didn't pay. Read here of how People feared a return of the depression. But experienced unheard-of prosperity. Cities lost population to suburbia. And thousands moved west and southwest. 1954 The Supreme Court hands down the Brown decision. 1955 The Montgomery bus boycott is launched. 1956 The Highway Act is passed. 1956 A crisis occurs over the Suez Canal. 1956 The Hungarians revolt against Soviet rule. 1957 The Eisenhower Doctrine is announced. 1957 Little Rock Central High School is integrated by federal order. 1957 The Soviets send Sputnik I into orbit. 1958 U.S. Marines land in Lebanon. 1959 Castro takes over in Cuba. 1960 The USSR shoots down a United States spy plane. The birth of suburbia. In the 1950s the two-car family became commonplace, and roadbuilding boomed. The 1956 Highway Act gave the nation a network of superhighways (map on page 630), and nearly 74 million vehicles crowded the roads. Drive-in movies, restaurants, banks, and even churches indicated the new mobility (freedom of movement) enjoyed by Americans. So did the growth of suburbs, the "bedroom" communities on the outskirts of large cities. The automobile and the high- speed highway made it possible for people to live twenty or thirty miles from a city and still get to work easily. By 1950, 37 million people lived in suburbia. Two decades later this figure had doubled. mortgages. This meant that banks were willing to accept down payments of as little as 5 or 10 per cent of the total cost. But some observers expressed alarm. They worried about what living crammed together in identical little houses would do to people. Folk singer Malvina Reynolds echoed their worries: Little boxes on the hillside Little boxes made of licky-lacky Little boxes on the hillside. Little boxes all the same. There's a green one and a pink one And a blue one and a yellow one and they're all made out of ticky-tacky And they all look the same. From the song "Little Boxes." words and music by Malvina Reynolds, t Copyright Schroder Music Co. (ASCAP) 1962. Used by permission. 1950 1960 •protected figures 1970 1980* Others were concerned by the way suburbs gobbled up the open spaces of the countryside. They had nightmares of a nation covered with Levittowns. Many also denounced the newness of suburbia. They wondered how a family could sink its roots in a community where a supermarket and a gas station were the most permanent institutions. Black cities, white suburbs. The rush to suburbia dramatically changed the character of many cities. The old area inside the city limits, the central city, stopped growing or lost population as while families moved out. At the same time, large numbers of blacks from the South migrated to northern cities. Discrimination in the suburbs kept out even the few who could afford homes there. Black families had no choice but to move into the central city. Metropolitan Areas include central cities and sub urbs. They have grown rapidly since 1950. Many w'hites left for the suburbs to "escape" the incoming blacks. During the 1950s the twelve largest cities in the United States lost two million white residents and gained 1.8 million blacks. In 1940, Washington, D.C., had been 72 per cent white; twenty years later it was over 50 per cent black. Cities like Newark. New Jersey, Atlanta, Georgia, and Gary, Indiana, were about 35 per cent black by the 1960s. The postwar migration of blacks to northern cities was caused by the introduction of machines on southern farms. By the 1960s only about half of the nation's black population remained in the South. But low' incomes and discrimination forced them to live in city slums in the north. The suburbs were still 95 per cent white in 1970. A skillful leader. The Supreme Court had given a cutting edge to much of the civil rights legislation. In the Brown decision of 1954, the Court had said it was illegal to segregate schools on the basis of race (page 631). But this was only the first of the drastic changes brought about by the Supreme Court over the next fifteen years. During this period the Court became known as "the Warren Court," after its Chief Justice, Earl Warren. Before his appointment to the Court by President Eisenhower in 1953, Warren had been active in California politics. As the state's attorney general, he had played a major role in the internment of Japanese Americans during World War II (page 568). This was hardly the basis for supposing that he would take a strong interest in protecting citizen rights. But Warren proved skillful in leading the Supreme Court to decisions that significantly advanced civil liberties. A controversial decision. In a series of cases from 1961 to 1972, the Supreme Court steadily expanded the legal protection of persons facing trial. Cidron v. Wain- right (1963) guaranteed every person charged with a serious crime the right to a lawyer's advice. If such a person could not afford to hire counsel, the local court would have to appoint one. In 1972, a further decision expanded this protection to persons accused of any crime punishable by a jail sentence. Not since the 1870s (page 371) had American 676 cities seen disturbances like those of 1967 and 1968. of crushing poverty and of unrelieved hopelessness. In the black ghettos nothing ever seemed to get better. "What white Americans have never fully understood— but what the Negro can never forget—is that white society is deeply implicated in the ghetto," the Report noted. "White institutions created it, white institutions maintain it, and white society condones it." The Report concluded, "Our nation is moving toward two societies, one black and one white—separate and unequal." "To do God's will." On April 4, 1968, Martin Luther King, Jr., was killed by a sniper's bullet. He was shot while standing on the balcony of a Memphis motel. The assassin was later identified as James Earl Ray, a white man. King had lived with threats of violence for so long that he had come to accept them. The day before his death, he had given an address in which he said, "I just want to do God's will. And he's allowed me to go up to the mountain, and I've looked over and I've seen the Promised Land. I may not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight that we as a people will get to the Promised Land." On King's tomb in Atlanta was inscribed, "Free at last, free at last, thank God Almighty I'm free at last." The violent death of a man who had given so much for nonviolence led to massive riots in Washington, D.C., Chicago, and a hundred other towns and cities. It was 1967 all over again. The overcrowded ghettos. Almost a quarter of all Americans lived in the deepest poverty. Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Orientals, Appalachian whites, American Indians, and the aged made up a disproportionate number of the poor, but black Americans had special problems. 