«
Hattmas A. Bailey David M. Kennedy
SIXTH EDITION
The .
American
Pageant
A History of the Republic
VOLUME I

Copyright © 1979 by D. C. Heath anti Company.
Previous editions copyright © 1975, 1971, 1966, 1961, and 1956 by
I). C. Heath and Company.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or any information storage or retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
Printed in the United States of America.
International Standard Book Number: 0-669-00353-0
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 78-53617
I,
e
»_
p
ir
Dr
st
as
DS.
ty-
Id-
:er
ib-
the
[ largest families were borne by several mothers.
The death rate among infants and children was
| also terrifying; one mother lost twenty of her
offspring in early childhood.
Immigrants likewise swelled the total, as tens
of thousands poured in from the British Isles and
[ Europe. They, too, were an unusually reproduc-
tive lot, for adults who have enough energy to
[emigrate are ordinarily of a child-begetting and
dbcaring age.
The bulk of the population was cooped up east
[ the Alleghenies, although by 1775 a vanguard
hi pioneers had trickled into the stump-studded
rings of Tennessee and Kentucky. The most
ilous colonies in 1775 were Virginia, Mas-
husetts, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and
yland-in that order. There were only four
uunities that might properly be called cities;
delphia, including suburbs, was first with
ut 34,000, while New York, Boston, and
ston were strung out behind. About 90 per-
t of the people lived in rural areas.
Mingling of the Races
ICelonial America was a melting pot, and had been
i the outset. The population, although basic-
ity English in stock and language, was pictur-
ed mottled with sizable foreign groups,
aw-accented Germans constituted about
vmiiniminiimiaiiaiiiiiniiniiriiiniminiinin
A young Frenchman named Crevecoeur
wrote about 1770 of the mixed population.
.^^I'They are a mixture of English, Scotch,
h	Irish. French, Dutch, Germans, and Swedes.
From this promiscuous breed, that race
now called Americans have arisen. . . .
[I could point out to you a family whose
[grandfather was an Englishman, whose wife
was Dutch, whose son married a French
woman, and whose present four sons have
now four wives of different nations.”
nniinnininininininnninniniiin
NATIONALITIES IN 1775
6 percent of the total population, or 150,000, by
1775. Fleeing religious persecution, economic
oppression, and the ravages of war, they had
flocked to America in the early 1700s, and had
settled chiefly in Pennsylvania. Known popularly
but erroneously as the Pennsylvania Dutch, they
totaled about one-third of the colony’s population.
In Philadelphia the street signs were painted in
both German and English.
These German newcomers moved into the back
country of Pennsylvania, where their splendid
stone barns gave—and still give—mute evidence
of industry' and prosperity. Not having been
brought up as Englishmen, they had no deep-
rooted loyalty to the British Crown, and they clung
tenaciously to their German language and cus-
toms. But as permanent settlers they became the
forebears of many distinguished Americans, in-
cluding George Herman (“Babe") Ruth, the home-
run king, and President Dwight D. Eisenhower.
The Scotch-Irish, who in 1775 numbered about
175,000, or 7 percent of the population, were an
62 The Character of Colonial Society
important non-English group, although English-
speaking. They were not Irish at all, but turbulent
Scots Lowlanders. Over a period of many decades,
they had first been transplanted to Northern Ire-
land, where they had not prospered. The Irish
Catholics already there, hating Scotch Presby-
terianism, resented the intruders, and still do.
The economic life of the Scolch-Irish was severely
hampered, especially when the English govern-
ment placed burdensome restrictions on their
production of linens and woolens.
Early in the 1700s tens of thousands of embit-
tered Scotch-Irish finally pulled up stakes and
came to America, chiefly to tolerant and deep-
soiled Pennsylvania. Finding the best acres already
taken by Germans and Quakers, they pushed out
onto the frontier. There many of them illegally
but defiantly squatted on the unoccupied lands,
and quarreled with both red and white owners.
It was said, somewhat unfairly, that the Scotch-
Irish kept the Sabbath—and all else they could
lay their hands on. Pugnacious, lawless, and in-
dividualistic, they brought with them the Scottish
secrets of whiskey distilling and proceeded to set
up their own stills. Already experienced colonizers
and agitators in Ireland, they proved to be superb
frontiersmen and Indian fighters. They cherished
no love for the British government which had
uprooted them, and many of them—including the
youthful Andrew Jackson—joined the embattled
American Revolutionists. All told, about a dozen
future Presidents were of Scotch-Irish descent.
Approximately 5 percent of the multi-colored
colonial population consisted of other foreign
groups. These embraced French Huguenots.
Welsh, Dutch, Swedes, Jews, Irish, Swiss, and
Scots Highlanders—as distinguished from the
Scotch-Irish. Except for the Scots Highlanders,
such hodgepodge elements felt little loyalty to
the British Crown.
By far the largest single non-English group was
African. In all, about 350,000 blacks were carried
in chains to North America. Yet they were only
a tiny fraction of the 10 million brought to the
New World as a whole in the three and a half
TO BE	SOLD,
On Saturday the 27th in(>4nt, it the L t|*4c>n Coffee houfe ;
Twclte or Fourteen
Valuable NEGROES,
o’tlotkf
A Pennsylvania Advertisement lor Slaves In the 1760s.
Note that the slaves are said to have had smallpox and
to be able to speak English. (New York Public Library.)
I
<
t
1
b
r
E
n
ti
o
E
o
centuries of slave trading. Most were taken i*
British slavers off the West African “slave coas
of the Gulf of Guinea, herded aboard swelteriq
ships for the horrifying "middle passage," id
sold on auction blocks in American ports. Thw
new masters then hauled them into the interior
where they typically worked in gangs of ten is
one hundred slaves on the big plantations. Afttt
the middle of the 17th Century, Virginia and Man
Estimated Population Elements, 1790*
(based on family names)
Ethnic Groups	.	~1 Xumber Percenter	
English and Welsh	2,605,699	66.3^
Scotch (including Scotch-Irish)	221,562	5.6
German	176,407	4.5
Dutch	78,959	2.0
Irish	61,534	1.6
French	17,619	0.4
AH other whites	10.664	0.3
Black	757,181	19.3
GRAND TOTAL	V929.f>25	
“Rossitcr, A Century of Population Growth (1909). Later
males by Barker and Hansen (1931) arc not used here bcc
they are confused by the inclusion of Spanish and Fn
elements later a part of the United States.
F
C
o
h
\\
h
ti
IT
ai
ir
ft
e«
fr
ir
tc
Jt
V\
at
nt
of
sh
so
in
ar
ar
ge
Social Gradations 63
* land virtually required that all Africans—or their
■ descendants, Afro-Americans—be slaves. By 1700
I rigid slave "codes” regulated black behavior in
the South, where nearly 90 percent of the blacks
lived.
I The population of the thirteen colonies, though
glasically Anglo-Saxon, was perhaps the most
mixed to be found anywhere in the world. New
id, not surprisingly, boasted more people
native to America and England than other sec-
tions. Yet of the fifty-six signers of the Declaration
Independence in 1776, eighteen were non-
ish, and eight of these men had been born
ide the colonies.
ntler Patricians
g social inequalities existed in all the col-
despite the leveling tendencies of a crude
tier life. Cleavages were sharpest in the South,
its dominant planter aristocracy, and per-
least sharp in small-farm New England. The
lanted settlers were merely re-creating on a
ied scale the social structure they had known
IB home. But yeasty democratic forces were work-
significant changes. The most remarkable
re of the social ladder was the rags-to-riches
with which an ambitious colonial might rise
a lower rung to a higher one, quite unlike
Old England.
\tlhe top of the social ladder towered the aris-
They were the merchant princes (like
Hancock), the landed gentry (like George
gton), the wealthier professional men,
the clergy of the established churches. Then-
ars were swelled by the well-dressed British
.including the governors and other "ruflle-
Anglicans.”
English law of primogeniture fostered
barriers. By permitting the eldest son to
it all or most of his father's estate, this
restriction helped perpetuate a landed
\cy, especially in the South. Southern
with their charm, culture, and leisure
ARISTOCRATS LEADING PLANTERS.
THE COLONIAL SOCIAL PYRAMID, 1775
(an approximation)
for both fox hunting and statecraft—contributed
richly to American social and political life.
Aristocrats were proud of their superior status,
and often dressed flashily to show it off, displaying
brocades, satins, and laces. Early colonial laws
expressly forbade persons of the "meaner sort”
to dress above their "station." In 18th-Century
Virginia a tailor was fined and jailed for arranging
to race his horse—"a sport only for gentlemen.”
People were often seated in churches and
schools according to their social rank. John
Adams, later second President of the United
Stales, was placed fourteenth in a class of twenty-
four at Harvard, where ability also affected one’s
standing. Only a fraction of those settlers coming
to early New England were entitled to be ad-
dressed by the exalted title of “mister.”
The Lower Rungs of Society
Below the aristocracy was the middle class—
the backbone of the colonies. It consisted chiefly
of the small farmers, often clad in buckskin
breeches, who owned modest holdings and tilled
them with their own hands and horses. Closely
associated with this group were the skilled arti-
sans, with their well-greased leather aprons, and
64 The Character of Colonial Society
Franklin's Press. Benja-
min Franklin, a many-
sided Philadelphian, was
the best known and most
prosperous colonial
printer. He rose to hob-
nob with European
royalty.
the smaller tradesmen. America's most famous
printer, Benjamin Franklin, was never fully ac-
cepted by the snobs of his adopted Philadelphia.
The son of a Boston candlemaker, he was looked
down upon as a social climber—a person in
"trade."
Below the prosperous middle class were "hired
hands" and other landless poor whites. Happily,
the ne’er-do-wells were not numerous; extreme
poverty and extreme wealth were both rather rare.
Even lower on the social ladder were the inden-
tured servants, of whom perhaps 250,000 had
arrived by 1775. These "white slaves” were mainly
persons who could not afford to pay their passage
across the Atlantic. In return for transportation,
they voluntarily mortgaged the sweat of their bod-
ies for a period of years, usually four or more.
Their lot was often harsh, and runaways were
common.
Indentured servants, upon serving their time,
frequently were given or otherwise secured land,
and the more enterprising souls often became
prosperous. Nor did any serious social stigma
attach to them. Some even broke up into the up-
per crust of aristocracy, and two became signers
of the Declaration of Independence. The inden-
tu red-servant system admittedly inflicted much
hardship, but it did give tens of thousands of
impoverished people a chance to start anew in the
Land of Opportunity.
Far less desirable than the voluntary indentured
servants were the paupers and convicts who w
involuntarily shipped over as indentured servant
Altogether, about 50,000 "jayle birds" wert
dumped on the American colonies by the Londoj
authorities. This riffralf crowd, including robber1
rapists, and murderers, was generally sullen ait
undesirable, and not bubbling over with good
will for the King’s government. But many comic
were the unfortunate victims of circumstance
and of a viciously unfair penal code that include
about 200 capital crimes. Some of the deportee
in fact, came to be highly respected citizens.
Luckless black slaves remained the mudsill
of society. Enchained in all the colonies, tin;
were concentrated in the warm plantation Soutl
In South Carolina, for example, they outnumbers
the whites two to one. Some of the colonial legu
latures, foreseeing the dangers resulting from,
heavy concentration of rebellious slaves, £
tempted to restrict or halt their importation. Bn
the British authorities vetoed all such effort
Many colonials looked upon this veto as a call
disregard of their welfare, although it was doa
primarily in the interests of imperial policy
of the British and New England slave trad
Thomas Jefferson, himself a slaveholder, assaila
such vetoes in an early draft of the Declaratia
of Independence, but his proposed clause w
finally dropped, largely out of regar d for Souther
sensibilities.
A few of the blacks had been freed, but th
vast majority were condemned to a life undf
the lash. The universal passion for freedom ventet
itself dining the colonial era in numerous case
of arson, murder, and insurrection or near
insurrection. A slave revolt erupted in New You.
City in 1721 which cost the lives of a dozen white
and caused the execution of twenty-one black
some of them burned at the stake over a sk»
fire. Yet the Africans made a significant contij
bution to America's early development throui
their labor, chiefly the sweaty toil of clearia
swamps, grubbing out trees, and other meu
tasks. A few of them were permitted to becoq
artisans—carpenters, bricklayers, tanners—that
(
l
in
80 The Road to Revolution
Nova Brit amnia,
OFFERING MOST
Excellent rruites by Planting in
Virginia.
Exciting all fuchasbc well affected
10 further the fame.
L O X D O »	....
Pnotedfor S<	M»t «» ■, *nd *rc to bo uia JC
h*i Shoo in P«uh Churctvyar A* dx
Signe of the Bui-hcxL
I I ♦ I*
Advertisement of a Voyage
to America, 1609
them had not been able to gel along, whether so-
cially, politically, economically, or religiously.
Some of them were tired of taking off their hats
and standing bareheaded in the presence of their
“betters.” Others wanted a larger share in govern-
ment, or a richer portion of this world’s goods, or
an opportunity to worship God in their own pecu-
liar way.
The nightmare of crossing the Atlantic normally
lasted about six to eight weeks, often much longer.
Ships were frequently turned into “floating cof-
fins” by food shortages or epidemics of disease; in
one extreme case 350 of 400 passengers and crew
perished. Cannibalism was not unknown, and
starving men fought over the bodies of vermin,
a sailor’s song ran:
We ate the mice, we ate the rats.
And through the hold we ran like cats.
Such a perilous crossing left many emotion!
scars. Survivors who staggered ashore on fa
Promised Land were, as a rule, isolated spiritual;
from the faraway Old World. They were mat
than ever aware that the long arm of the Londa
government, enfeebled by 3,000 miles of oceas
could not reach them nearly so effectively as i
home. Distance weakens authority; great distant
weakens authority greatly.
America's lonely wilderness likewise stints
lated ideas of independence. Back in Englais
some villagers had lived near graveyards thi
contained the bones of their ancestors for a that
sand years past. Born into such conservative at
roundings, the poor plowman did not quest®
the social rut in which he found himself. But i
the New World he was not held down by the sew
of his overlords.
In America all was strange, crude, differen
Dense forests and the rugged pioneering cot
ditions changed patterns of living, and const
quently habits of thought. Those wretched settla
perished who could not adapt themselves to tha
raw surroundings, and hundreds of the early \l
ginia colonists paid the supreme penalty. Befa
long, men were eating Indian com, wearing Indu
moccasins and buckskin, and in extreme instants
on the frontier uttering the war whoop as the
scalped their fallen red foe. Hacking a home a
of the wildwood with an ax developed strengs
self-confidence, individualism, and a spirit s
independence.
As the Americans matured, they acquired prk
leges of self-government enjoyed by no othe
colonial peoples. They set up thirteen parliamen
of their own, and aped the parliamentary method
of the Mother Country. Ultimately they carnet
regard their own legislative bodies as more i
less on a footing with the great Mother of Paru
ments in London. One governor of Rhode Islac
Jefferson in Power 167
ef-
s
ing
His
ouse
ren
the
/ely
;iety.)
pers.
'ears,
by a
ralist
:hical
was
uiim-
i was
:iples
;re in
rivate
r.	The
e dis-
orked
ictical
re t o re
e one
publi-
larked
y. The
would
s.	But
ugural
annninininiiiinininin'inninimniinini
Regarding removals Jefferson wrote privately
(March 29, 1801), “Officers who have been
guilty of gross abuses of office, such as
marshals packing juries, &c„ I shall now
remove, as my predecessor [Adams] ought in
justice to have done. The instances will be
few, and governed by strict rule, & not party
passion. The right of opinion shall suffer no
invasion from me."
mninii9iniiaiiaii3iiaii9iianniiaii!iiinii3ii3iiai
iddress, showed unexpected moderation. Many
iMc Federalists were retained at first, though in
k course a considerable number of them were
jplaced by Republicans. This process of ladling
at the political gravy was agonizingly slow for
apectant spoilsmen, who in grim jest rephrased
•e of Jefferson’s remarks to read, “Few die.
wk resign.”
1 Parceling out the loaves of office as a reward
J (orparty service is the "spoils system." Jefferson,
|athcr than Jackson, has sometimes been referred
lo as the father of this partisan practice. But the
* of the accusation is weakened by the small
iber whom the victorious Virginian dropped,
well as his reluctance to discharge competent
Even so, he ultimately dismissed about as
a percentage as Jackson.
>nian Reform Without Revolution
the outset, Jefferson was determined to undo
Federalist abuses begotten by the anti-French
ria. The hated Alien and Sedition Laws had
idy expired. The incoming President speedily
lotted the "martyrs” serving sentences under
Sedition Law, and the government returned
f fines. Shortly after the Congress met. the
•nians enacted the new naturalization law
ilS02. It reduced the unreasonable requirement
(fourteen years of residence to the former and
reasonable requirement of five years,
lefferson actually kicked away only one sub-
stantial prop of the Hamiltonian system. He hated
the excise tax, which bred bureaucrats and bore
heavily on his farmer following, and he early per-
suaded Congress to repeal it. His devotion to
principle thus cost the federal government about
a million dollars a year in urgently needed revenue.
Swiss-born and French-accented Albert Gal-
latin. "Watchdog of the Treasury," proved to be as
able a secretary' of the treasury as Hamilton. Galla-
tin agreed with Jefferson that a national debt was
a bane rather than a blessing, and by strict econ-
omy succeeded in reducing it substantially while
balancing the budget.
Except for excising the excise tax, the Jeffer-
sonians left the Hamiltonian framework essen-
tially intact. They launched no attack on the Bank
of the United States, and they did not repeal the
mildly protective Federalist tariff. In later years
they embraced Federalism to such a degree as to
recharter a bigger Bank and to boost the protective
tariff to higher levels.
The "Revolution of 1800,” so far as it was a
revolution, thus turned out to be largely one of
men rather than of measures, especially in the
national government. Generally speaking, the
agrarian aristocrats of the Republican South and
West—men like Jefferson—elbowed aside the com-
mercial and manufacturing aristocrats of the
Federalist northern seaboard.
The “Dead Clutch” of the Judiciary
The "death bed" Judiciary Act of 1801 was one of
the last important laws passed by the expiring
Federalist Congress. It created sixteen new federal
judgeships and other judicial offices. President
Adams remained at his desk until nine o’clock in
the evening of his last day in office, allegedly sign-
ing the commissions of the Federalist "midnight
judges.” (Actually only three commissions were
signed on his last day.)
This Federalist-sponsored Judiciary Act, though
a long-overdue reform, aroused bitter resentment.
"Packing" these lifetime posts with anti-Jeffer-
sonian partisans was, in Republican eyes, a brazen
Injustice for the Indians 243
ni
ks
Him
day
itic step was overdue, but coming at that time
lave the speculative bubble another sharp prick.
1 money brought hard feelings and hard times
tthe West.
ationary pressures nevertheless continued.
^ 1835 the national debt was finally liquidated
rthe first time, but additional funds still poured
the federal Treasury. This revenue flowed
cipallv from the customs houses, which were
efiting from the high tariff duties and the heavy
orts resulting from Hush times. In 1836 a
eme passed Congress for distributing the sur-
above $5 million to the states. When this
isfer began, early in 1837, the risky speculative
was given another boost. Later that year
t panic broke, and the bothersome problem of
; surplus became the even more bothersome
blem of a deficit.
splanting the Tribes
jndrous indeed was the continued expansion
the American population. The unflagging fer-
of the people, reinforced by immigration,
ight the total figure to nearly 13 million by
D-or more than three times that of 1790.* Most
the states east of the Mississippi had been ad-
iled, leaving islands of red men marooned on
ids coveted by their white neighbors,
ftesident Jackson, the veteran Indian lighter
m as "Big Knife,” was convinced of the folly
continuing to regard the tribes as separate
dons within the individual states. When Georgia
jblier pnpted to exercise control over the Cherokees,
mic," fthe Supreme Court thrice upheld the rights of
ister” f Indians, Jackson viewed continued defiance
; foes. Ithe state with unaccustomed composure. A
untry ^ might flout federal law if white men thereby
ar the ped at the Indians’ expense. In a callous sneer
y had fthe red men's defender, Jackson reportedly
ckson Wped, "John Marshall has made his decision;
rcularl * let him enforce it."
to be
. This (population figures since 1790, see Appendix.
Yet Jackson also harbored protective feelings
toward the Indians. Their present condition, he
told Congress in 1829, “contrasted with what they
once were, makes a most powerful appeal to our
sympathies." Could not something be done, he
implored, to preserve “this much injured race"?
Jackson proposed a bodily removal of the remain-
ing Eastern tribes—chiefly Cherokee, Creek, Choc-
taw, and Chickasaw—beyond the Mississippi.
Individual Indians might remain if they adopted
white men’s ways. Emigration should be volun-
tary, since it would be "cruel and unjust to compel
the aborigines to abandon the graves of their
fathers."
Jackson's policy was high-sounding, but it led to
the more or less forcible uprooting of more than
100,000 Indians in the 1830s. Many died on the
"Trail of Tears" to the newly established Indian
Territory (present Oklahoma), where they were to
be “permanently” free of white encroachments.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs was established in
1836 to administer relations with America’s origi-
nal inhabitants. But as the landhungry "palefaces”
pushed west faster than anticipated, the govern-
ment’s guarantees went up in smoke. The "perma-
nent” frontier lasted about fifteen years.
SOUTHERN TRIBES BEFORE TRANSPLANTING

Labor and New Inventions 279
Ihe day laborer al last learned that his most
at weapon was to lay down his tools, even at
risk of prosecution under the law. Dozens of
es erupted in the 1830s and 1840s, most of
for higher wages, some for the ten-hour day,
a few for such unusual goals as the right to
ke on the job. The workingman usually lost
it strikes than he won, for the employer could
put to such tactics as the importing of slrike-
Inkers-often derisively called "scabs" or “rats,"
pd often fresh off the boat from the Old World,
labor long raised its voice against the unrestricted
pouring of wage-depressing and union-busting
■migrant workers.
Ilabor's ear ly and painful efforts at organization
id netted some 300,000 trade unionists by 1830.
nt such encouraging gains were dashed on the
teles of hard times following the severe depres-
p of 1837. As unemployment spread, union
■snbership shriveled. Yet toilers won a hope-
pg legal victory in 1842. The supreme court of
Ktchusetts ruled in the case of Commonwealth
punt that labor unions were not illegal conspir-
ms, provided that their methods were "honor-
ik and peaceful." This enlightened decision did
( legalize the strike overnight throughout the
iiiaaaiiaiiaiiniiciiiaiiciiiniiatiaiifiiicniaiiniiaiini
I Violence broke out along the New York water-
I front in 1836 when laborers striking for higher
| wages attacked "scabs.” "The Mayor," Philip
I Hone's diary records, "who acts with vigour
and firmness, ordered out the troops, who are
now on duty with loaded arms. . . . These
measures have restored order for the present,
but I fear the elements of disorder are at work;
the bands of Irish and other foreigners, insti-
gated by the mischievous councils of the
trades-union and other combinations of dis-
I contented men, are acquiring strength and
importance which will ere long be difficult to
quell.”
mminiiniiniiniiniiiniiniiniiiiiiniiniiniiniminm!
country, but it was a significant signpost of the
times. Trade unions still had a rocky row to hoe,
stretching ahead for about a century, before they
could meet management on relatively even terms.
Western Farmers Reap a Revolution
in the Fields
As smoke-belching factories altered the Eastern
skyline, flourishing farms were changing the face
of the West. The trans-Allegheny region—especially
the Ohio-Indiana-Ulinois tier—was fast becoming
the nation’s breadbasket. Before long, it would
become a granary to the world.
Pioneer farmers first hacked a dealing out of
the forest, and then planted their painfully fur-
rowed fields to corn. The yellow grain was amaz-
ingly versatile. It could be fed to hogs (“corn on
the hoof") or distilled into liquor (“corn in the
bottle"). Both these products could be more easily
transported than the bulky grain itself , and they
became the early Western farmer's staple market
items. So many hogs were butchered, traded, or
shipped at Cincinnati that the city was known as
the "Porkopolis" of the West.
Most Western produce was at first floated down
the Ohio-Mississippi River system, to feed the lusty
appetite of the booming Cotton Kingdom. But
Western farmers were as hungry for profits as
Southern slaves and planters were for food. These
soil tillers, spurred on by the easy availability of
seemingly boundless acres, sought ways to bring
more and more land into cultivation.
Ingenious inventors came to their aid. One of
the first obstacles that frustrated the farmers was
the thickly matted soil of the West, which snagged
and snapped fragile wooden plows. John Deere of
Illinois in 1837 finally produced a steel plow that
broke the virgin soil. Sharp and effective, it was
also light enough to be pulled by horses, rather
than oxen.
Virginia-born Cyrus McCormick contributed the
most wondrous contraption of all: a mechanical
mower-reaper. The clattering cogs of McCormick’s

296 Creating an American Character, 1790-1860
Irish and German immigration by Decade
Years	Irish	German	All Others	Grand Total
1820-1830	Unknown	Unknown	Unknown	151,824
1831-1840	207,381	152.454	239,290	599,125
1841-1850	780,719	434,626	497.906	1,713,251
1851-1860	914,119	951,667	732,428	2,598,214
1861-1870	435,778	787,468	1,091,578	2,314,824
1871-1880	436,871	718,182	1,657,138	2,812,191
1881-1890	655.482	1.452.970	3,138,161	5.246,613
1891-1900	388,416	505,152	2,793,996	3,687,564
Such overrapid urbanization unfortunately
brought undesirable by-products. It intensified the
problems of smelly slums, feeble street lighting,
inadequate policing, impure water, foul sewage,
ravenous rats, and improper garbage disposal.
Hogs poked their scavenging snouts about many
city streets as late as the 1840s. Boston in 1823
pioneered with a sewage system; and New York
in 1842 abandoned wells and cisterns for a piped-
in water supply. The city thus unknowingly elim-
inated the breeding places of many disease-carry-
ing mosquitoes.
A continuing high birthrate accounted for most
of the increase in population, but by the 1840s the
tides of immigration were adding hundreds of
thousands more. Before this decade, immigrants
had been flowing in at the rate of about 60,000 a
year, but suddenly the influx was tripled in the
1840s, and then quadrupled in the 1850s. During
these two feverish decades, over a million and a
half Irish, and nearly as many Germans, swarmed
down the gangplanks. Why did they come?
The immigrants came partly because Europe
seemed to be running out of room. The popula-
tion of the Old World more than doubled in the
19th Century, and Europe began to generate a
great seething pool of apparently "surplus” people.
They were displaced and footloose in their home-
lands before they felt the tug of the American
magnet. Indeed, at least as many people moved
about within Europe as crossed the Atlantic.
America benefited from these people-chumin|
changes but did not set them all in motion. Nor
was the United States the sole beneficiary of the
process; of the nearly 60 million persons vrt#
abandoned Europe in the century after I84Q
about 25 million went somewhere other than ds
United Stales.
Yet America still beckoned most strongly to ths
struggling masses of Europe, and the majority of
migrants headed for the “land of freedom an:
opportunity." There was freedom from aristocratic
caste and state church; there was abundant op
portunity to secure broad acres and better ones
condition. Much-read letters sent home by imi-
grants—"America letters”—often described it
glowing terms the richer life: low taxes, no coo-
pul sory military service, and "three meat mess
a day." The introduction of transoceanic steam
ships also meant that the immigrants could cooe
speedily, in a matter of ten or twelve days instd
of ten or twelve weeks. They were still jamms
into unsanitary quarters, thus suffering an app» I
ling death rate, but the nightmare was more e-
durable because it was shorter.
The Emerald Isle Moves West
pe
sw
we
git
pei
1
the
to
exp
the
1
we:
eqt
citi
Ne'
Iris
pas
bio
Isle
r.h mi
Ireland, already groaning under the heavy haa
of British overlords, was prostrated in the
1840s. A terrible rot attacked the potato crop,
which the people had become dangerously
t alre
:• b
iy i
Irish Immigrants 297
ing
dor
the
vho
340,
the
Ragged Irish Immi-
grant Arriving In
America
ident, and about one-fourth of them were
ptawav by disease and hunger. Starved bodies
found dead by the roadsides with blades of
in their mouths. All told, about 2 million
d.
of thousands of destitute souls, fleeing
id of Famine for the Land of Plenty, flocked
rica in the "Black Forties." Ireland's great
has been population; and the Irish take
place beside the Jews as a dispersed people,
come uprooted newcomers, too poor to move
istead and buy the necessary land, livestock, and
■nmedipnent, swarmed into the larger seaboard
appal- Noteworthy were Boston and particularly
re en- York, which rapidly became the largest
city in the world. Before many decades had
there were more people of Hibernian
jin America than on the "ould sod" of Erin's
i- Yt
E
y hand t luckless Irish received no red-carpet treat-
e mid-1 Forced to live in squalor, they worsened
-op, on ty vile slum conditions. They were scorned
sl\ de-polder American stock, especially "proper"
Bostonians, who regarded the impoverished new-
comers as a social menace. The luckless "Paddies”
(Patricks) were forced to resort to pick-and-shovel
drudgery on canals and railroads, where many left
their bones as victims of cholera, smallpox, and
premature explosions. It was said, with exaggera-
tion, that an Irishman lay buried under every
railroad lie. Even so. the Irish were hated by those
laborers whose jobs they took. “No Irish Need
Apply” was a sign commonly hung in shop win-
dows, and was often abbreviated to NINA.
Sad to relate, Irishmen created some of their
own problems. It is true that they were tradition-
ally agreeable, generous, witty, and lighthearted.
But they loved a fight, and were inclined to seek
refuge from their hardships in the bottle. Whiskey,
it was said, had been invented to prevent the Irish
from conquering the world. A contemporary song
("Paddy Works on the Erie [Railway]") ran;
In eighteen hundred and forty-eight,
I learned to take my whisky- straight,
'Tis an illygant drink and can’t be bate,
For working on the railway.
These Gaelic new-comers, capitalizing on then-
good nature and warmhandedness, revealed a
flair for politics, especially at the local level. They
soon began to acquire control of powerful city
machines, notably Tammany Hall in New York.
Stalwart Irishmen, red-faced and beguilingly
brogued, gradually came to dominate the police
forces and fire departments of metropolitan areas.
American politicians made haste to cultivate the
Irish vote, especially in the politically potent state
of New York. Irishmen nursed long-standing
grievances against the British, and their burning
hatred lost nothing in the transatlantic transplant-
ing. As the Irish-Americans increased in number
—nearly 2 million arrived between 1830 and 1860-
officials in Washington glimpsed political gold in
those Hibernian hills. Administration spokesmen,
on the eve of elections, often found it politically
profitable to fire verbal volleys at London—a pro-
cess vulgarly known as "twisting the British Lion’s
tail.”
298 Creating tin American Character, 1790-1860
The Flight of the German
Forty-Eighters
The influx of refugees from Germany between
1830 and 1860 was hardly less spectacular than
that from Ireland. During these troubled years,
over a million and a hall thrifty Germans stepped
onto American soil. The bulk of them were poor
people, displaced by crop failures and by other
hardships. But a strong sprinkling were liberal
political refugees. Saddened by the collapse of the
democratic revolutions of 1848, they had decided
to leave the autocratic Fatherland and flee to
America—the one brightest hope of democracy.
The liberal German "Forty-Eighters," who came
to America for free government, are not to be
confused with the "Forty-Niners," who came to
California for free gold. The future history of
Germany—and indeed of the world—might well
have been less war-torn if these rare spirits had
remained at home as a seedbed for genuine de-
mocracy. But Germany's loss was America’s gain.
Zealous German liberals like the lanky and public-
spirited Carl Schurz, a relentless foe of slavery and
public corruption, contributed richly to the eleva-
tion of American political life.
Many of the Germanic newcomers, unlike the
Irish, possessed a modest amount of this world’s
goods. Most of them pushed out to the lush lands
of the Middle West, notably Wisconsin, where they
settled and established model farms. Like the
Irish, they formed an influential body of voters
whom American politicians shamelessly wooed.
But the Germans were less potent politically be-
cause their strength was more widely scattered.
The hand of Germans in shaping American life
tfiiiEiiniinii'3iiciiiriiic3iir)iiriii3iimi3iiriiiriiiaiiriiiniirii
Carl Schurz, the German-American patriot,
modified the famous Decatur toast. "Our
country, right or wrong,” to read, "Our country,
right or wrong. When right, to be kept right;
when wrong, to be put right.”
Itni[]iiniii3iiaiiaiitiiir]ii'iiiriiiniiriiiniiriii3ii3iiriiiriiiai
was widely felt in still other ways. They had lief J
from the militarism and wars of Europe, and (
sequently came to be a bulwark of isolations I
sentiment in the upper Mississippi Valley. BetteJ
educated on the whole than the stump-grub
Americans, they warmly supported public scho
including their Kindergarten (children’s gardeni|
They likewise did much to stimulate art and mu
As outspoken champions of freedom, they I
relentless enemies of slavery during the few
years before the Civil War.
Yet the Germans—often dubbed
Dutchmen”—were not altogether welcome
bors. Regarding themselves as culturally sup
they looked down their noses at both the j
Irishman and the old-stock Anglo-American. 1
were not only snobbish but clannish. Accusto
to the “Condnental Sunday” and uncurbed h|
Puritan tradition, they made merry on the Sab
and drank huge quantities of an amber beve
called Bier (beer), which dales its real popu
in America to their coming.* Their Old Wo
drinking habits, like those of the Irish newco
gave a severe setback to the movement for greats [
temperance in the use of alcohol.
Flare-Ups of Antl-Foreignism
ac
The invasion by this so-called immigrant "rabbk’
in the 1840s and 1850s inflamed the hates of Arne
ican "nativists." They feared that these foraj
hordes would out breed, outvote, and oserwhdl
the old "native” stock. Not only did the newconn
take jobs from "native" Americans, but the in
of displaced Irishmen were Roman Catholics.)
were a substantial minority of the Germans.!
Church of Rome was still widely regarded)
many old-line Americans as a "foreign” chutil
convents were commonly referred to as P<M
brothels.”
Roman Catholics were now* on the move. Tl
had formed a negligible minority during cob
__________ Cro.
'Frederick Pabst and Joseph Schlitz were among the Gta B.
immigrant brewers who “made Milwaukee famous."
Bare-Knuckle Journalism 309
and other human-
of the modern
tired murders, scandals
est stories in the manner
Did.
A leader in the new “gutter journalism" was er-
: James Gordon Bennett, who in 1835 founded
: New York Herald. His office desk consisted
(ftwo flour barrels with a plank laid across them;
I he was editor, reporter, proofreader, folder,
icashier. He believed that the function of news-
ers was not only to instruct but to startle, and
rand other editors lowered the public taste while
ing the price of their sheets. At all events,
Americans were now reading than ever
ttore.
The influence of journalism was vastly increased
l the march of mechanization. Telegraphy in-
intly updated the news, and "scoops” became
; newspaperman’s driving demon. Quick con-
twith events only hours old whetted the pub-
is appetite for more newsprint, and publishers
ht to multiply the output of their clanking
es. In 1846 Richard Hoe came to their aid
a cylindrical press that could spew forth
I papers in an hour.
t decades just before the Civil War marked
^dawn of the golden age of personal journalism,
paper publishing had not yet become a big
and editors like Horace Greeley of the
York Tribune owned and published their
I newspapers. His weekly edition enjoyed a
circulation outside New York State, and
.blic”—
DYING VIEWPOINTS
since the publication of Alexis de Tocqueville's
nocracy in America (1835, 1840), the period
ithe Revolution to the Civil War has been
jry ed- mied as a crucially formative phase in the
teracy, ping of American society. This was the time
; cents, mew institutions were being tested, new
laborer N absorbed, and new values sorted out. All
seeking 586 processes have traditionally been seen as
ced its ”9 UP *° a tremendous success story, in which
jtans energetically forged a distinctive national
led the
muse it
Horace Greeley, Out-
spoken Editor. He ran
for the presidency in
1872 and was badty
defeated.
since the idealistic Greeley was a merciless foe of
slavery, his word was law among a host of fol-
lowers, "Wait until the Weekly Tribune arrives."
remarked a New York farmer when asked his
opinion, "and then I can tell you what I think
about it.”
Passions ran incredibly high during this era of
personalized, hit-below-the-belt journalism. The
writing-fighting editors were frequently caned,
stabbed, or shot by those whom they verbally
abused. “You lie, you villain," wrote Greeley of a
rival editor, "you sinfully, wickedly, basely lie.”
Despite this violence and vulgarity, America was
making praiseworthy progress in lifting the mental
horizons of the masses. More people than ever
were now able to inform themselves on current
issues; and with increased knowledge went an
increased ability to make democracy work.
culture. But recently some historians have ques-
tioned this rather upbeat view and have asked what
elements were lost as the American people plunged
so breathlessly toward the future. Did the rise of
individualism corrode the cohesion of the commun-
ity? What cultural baggage did the immigrants leave
behind them? Were there severe social costs in the
sudden flowering of numerous religious sects? Did
the spread of formal education preserve or under-
mine traditional cultural forms?

318 The Ferment of Reform and Culture, 1790-1860
oped in a revival of Gothic forms, with their em-
phasis on pointed arches and large windows.
Talented Thomas Jefferson, architect of revolu-
tion, was probably the ablest American architect
of his generation. He brought a classical design to
his Virginia hilltop home, Monticcllo—perhaps the
most stately mansion in the nation (see p. 148). The
quadrangle of the University of Virginia at Char-
lottesville, another creation of Jefferson, remains
one of the finest examples of classical architecture
in America.
The art of painting continued to be handi-
capped. It suffered from the dollar grabbing of a
raw civilization; from the hustle, bustle, and ab-
sence of leisure; from the lack of a wealthy class
to sit for portraits—and then pay for them. Some
of the earliest painters were forced to go to Eng-
land, where they found both training and pa-
trons. America exported artists and imported art.
Painting, like the theater, also suffered from the
Puritan prejudice that art was a sinful waste of
time—and often obscene. John Adams boasted
that "he would not give a sixpence for a bust of
Phidias or a painting by Raphael.” When Edward
Everett, the eminent Boston scholar and orator,
placed a statue of Apollo in his home, he had its
naked limbs draped.
Competent painters nevertheless emerged. Gil-
bert Stuart (1755-1828), a spendthrift Rhode Is-
lander and one of the most gifted of the early
group, wielded his brush in England in competi-
tion with the best artists. He produced several
portraits of Washington, all of them somewhat
idealized and dehumanized. Truth to tell, the fa-
mous general had by then lost his natural teeth and
some of the original shape of his face. Charles
Willson Peale (1741-1827), a Marylander, painted
some sixty portraits of Washington, who patiently
sat for about fourteen of them. John Trumbull
(1756-1843), who had fought in the Revolutionary
War, recaptured its scenes and spirit on scores of
striking canvases.
During the nationalistic upsurge after the War
of 1812, American painters of portraits turned
increasingly from human landscapes to romantic
mirrorings of local landscapes. The Hudson River
School excelled in this type of art. At the same
time, portrait painters gradually encountered
some unwelcome competition from the invention
of a crude photograph known as the daguerreo-
type, perfected about 1839 by a Frenchman, Lous
Daguerre.
America Bursts into Song
Music was slowly shaking off the restraints of colo ||
nial days, when the prim Puritans had frowned*
upon non-religious singing. Melody-minded I
Americans received much inspiration from the
emergence of European musicians—Schubflt I
Mendelssohn, Chopin, Wagner. Growing numbm
of citizens were studying music, and the song-
loving; German immigrants of the 1840s and l8Sk
added richly to American culture. A mid-cenmiv }
boom in the manufacture of pianos reflected
improving tastes.
An appreciation of good music was increased!)) | 1
some noteworthy public performances. The N«
York Philharmonic Orchestra, one of the first
was organized in 1842. Ole Bull, the famous Nor-
wegian violin virtuoso, held audiences spellbound I
during his five tours of the country, from 1M
to 1880. Golden-voiced Jenny Lind, the “Swedht J
Nightingale,” who was also a talented actress arc 1
a rare Christian spirit, created a sensation in 1850-
A Satirical By-Produd
of Jenny Lind's Tow.
(Yankee Notions, 1852
l
A
fi
P
s
T
N
2. *7 00
330 The South and the Slavery Controversy
Harvesting Cotton. Slaves of both sexes picked cotton
on the great plantations. (Boston Public Library.)
War at Fort Sumter, did notable pioneering work
in soil restoration. Yet his best efforts were inad-
equate to cope with the problem.
The economic structure of the South became
increasingly monopolistic. As the land wore thin,
many small farmers sold their holdings to more
prosperous neighbors, and went north or west.
The big got bigger and the small smaller. When
the Civil War finally broke, a large percentage of
Southern farms had passed from the hands of the
families that had originally cleared them.
Another cancer in the bosom of the South was
the financial instability of the plantation system.
The temptation to ovcrspeculate in land and slaves
caused many a planter, including Andrew Jackson
in his later years, to plunge in beyond his depth.
Although the black bondsmen might in extreme
cases be fed for as little as ten cents a day, there
were other expenses. The slaves represented a
heavy investment of capital, perhaps $1,200 each
in the case of prime field hands; and they might
deliberately injure themselves or run away. An
entire slave quarter might be wiped out by disease
or even by lightning, as happened in one instance
to twenty luckless blacks.
Dominance by King Cotton likewise led to a
dangerous dependence on a one-crop economy,
whose price level was at the mercy of world con-
ditions. The whole system discouraged a health
diversification of agriculture and particularly of
manufacturing, for which the South was almost
ideally fitted. While concentrating on cotton, the
plantations had to import huge quantities of port
and grain from the upper Mississippi Valley.
Southern planters resented watching the ffatk
grow fat at their expense. They were pained h i
the heavy outward tlow of commissions and in-
terest to Northern middlemen, bankers, agents,
and shippers. True sons of the South, especial),
by the 1850s, deplored the fact that when bon
they were wrapped in Yankee-made swaddle
clothes, and that they spent the rest of their five
in servitude to Yankee manufacturing. Whenihci
died, they were laid in coffins held together siiti
Yankee nails, and were buried in graves dug wat
Yankee shovels. The South furnished the coqs
and the hole in the ground.
The Cotton Kingdom also repelled large-scak
European immigration, which added so richlyti
the manpower and wealth of the North. In 1W
iniinininiiniiiininiinimiiinn ii iinnor
Basil Hall, an Englishman, visited part ot the
cotton belt on a river steamer (1827-1828).
Noting the preoccupation with cotton, he
wrote; "All day and almost all night long, the
captain, pilot, crew, and passengers were
talking of nothing else; and sometimes our
ears were so wearied with the sound of cottm
cotton! cotton! that we gladly hailed a fresh
inundation of company in hopes of some
change—but alas! . . . What's cotton at?
was the first eager inquiry. ‘Ten cents [a
pound].' ‘Oh, that will never do!’ From the
cotton in the market they went to the crops
the fields—the frost which had nipped their
shoots—the hard times—the overtradings;
so round to the prices and prospects again
and again."
laiiniiaiiciiiaiitaiiaiiniiaiiciiitiiiaiiciiicKiflin
Gradations of Whites 331
ply 4.4 percent of the Southern population was
tign-bom, as compared with 18.7 percent for
: North. German and Irish immigration to the
ulh was generally discouraged by the competi-
) of slave labor, by the high cost of fertile land,
by European ignorance of cotton growing.
! diverting of non-English immigration to the
t caused the white South to become the most
t-Saxon section of the nation.
>e
13)
i Whites and Poor Whites
a handful of Southern aristocrats lived in
l-pillared mansions. Below the 1,733 fam-
; in 1850 who owned 100 or more slaves were
[less wealthy slaveowners. They totaled in 1850
:345,000 families, representing about 1,725,000
: persons. Over two-thirds of these families—
268 in all—owned fewer than ten slaves each.
;ath the slaveowners was the great body of
jveowning whites who, by 1860, had swelled
fcr numbers to 6,120,825. These rank-and-file
comprising about three-fourths of the
[population of the South, had no direct stake
|slavery. They fell roughly into three groups:
lowland whites, who were by far the most
jus; (2) the poor whites, who were generally
e-ridden; and (3) the semi-isolated mountain
s, who were the most independent-minded,
[hundreds of thousands of energetic lowland
ts included such folks as mechanics, lesser
len, and above all, small cotton farmers.
on!
Though owning no slaves themselves, they were
among the stoutest defenders of the slave system.
The carrot-on-the-stick ever dangling before their
noses was the hope of buying a slave or two, and
of parlaying their holdings into riches—all in ac-
cord with the "American dream." They also took
fierce pride in their presumed racial superiority,
which would be watered down if the slaves were
freed. Many of the poorer lowland whites were
hardly belter off economically than the Afro-
American; some, indeed, were not so well off.
But they clung desperately to their one visible
badge of presumed superiority.
Conspicuous among the millions of non-slave-
holders was a considerable sprinkling of poor
whites, whom even the slaves despised as the
“poor white trash.” Knowm also as "hillbillies."
“crackers,” or "clay eaters," they were often list-
less, pallid, shiftless, and misshapen. Later investi-
gations have revealed that many of them were not
so much lazy as sickly, suffering from malnutri-
tion and disease, including hookworm.
Mountain whites of the South are not to be con-
fused with the poor whites of the lowland cotton
belt. They were more or less marooned in the
valleys of the Appalachian range, stretching from
western Virginia to northern Georgia and Ala-
bama. Civilization had largely passed them by.
They were a kind of living ancestry, for some of
them retained Elizabethan speech forms and
habits that had long since died out in England.
As independent small farmers, the mountain
I	SLAVEOWNING FAMILIES, 1850
Sown 100 or more slaves
itiiini k	| 68.820 own 1 each
392 The War for Southern Independence

Tredegar Iron Works, Richmond, Virginia. This was by far the most important of the Con-
federate iron works. Using skilled slave labor, this plant equipped the army with nearly 1.200
scarce cannons. Without these works, the Confederacy probably would have collapsed. Their
presence in Richmond helps to explain why the South fought so hard to keep the city.
its vastly superior navy, it established a blockade
that choked off the bulk of Southern exports and
imports. This stoppage not only hampered the
South economically and militarily, but finally
shattered its morale. While strangling the Con-
federacy with one hand, the North could simul-
taneously keep open the sea lanes to Europe. It
was thus able to exchange huge quantities of grain
for munitions, and in this way it used the factories
of Europe to supplement its own. During the early
months of the war, the North imported many more
firearms from abroad than it was able to manu-
facture at home.
Union forces likewise enjoyed a much larger
reservoir of manpower. The loyal states had a
population of some 22 million; the seceding states,
9 million. This latter ligure included about 3.5
million slaves. The population advantage of the
North was somewhat greater than 2 to 1, and the
estimated enlistments ran 1,556,000 to 1,082,000.
Manpower odds against General Lee were ordi-
narily about 3 to 2, sometimes 3 to 1. Such superior
numbers usually gave the North the advantage of
choosing the point of attack.
A broad stream of European immigrants con-
Lieutenant Porter and Soldiers. Union soldiers of the
4th Michigan Infantry. (Library of Congress.)
Immigrants and Blacks 393
Immigration to U.S., 1860-1866
Year	Total	Britain	Ireland	Germany	AH Others
1860	153,640	29,737	48,637	54,491	20,775
1861	91,918	19,675	23,797	31,661	16,785
1862	91,985	24,639	23,351	27,529	16,466
1863	176,282	66.882	55,916	33,162	20,322
1864	193,418	53,428	63,523	57,276	19,191
1865*	248,120	82,465	29,772	83,424	52,459
1866	318,568	94,924	36,690	115,892	71,062
•Only the first three months of 1865 were war months.
ed to pour into the North, thanks to Northern
trol of the seas. Though slowed down a bit by
war, especially during the first two years, the
w totaled over 800,000 newcomers of both
from 1861 through 1865—or more than the
casualties in the armed services of the North,
bulk of the new arrivals were British, Irish,
German; and large numbers of them were
ced to enlist in the Union armies. Tens of
nds of earlier immigrants, inspired by a love
~dom and gratitude to their adopted land,
joined the colors. Altogether, about one-
of the Union forces were foreign-bom. in one
'' n, commands were given in four different
ges; and some German units even had
-accented ofTtcers of their own nationality,
mers branded foreign enlistees as "Hes-
or "Yankee Hessians."
nninminiiaiiininiiriininiimniiniriiiqii^i
i The two most prominent German-American
generals, Franz Sigel and Carl Schurz, were
both refugees from the German revolutions of
1848. Sigel did yeoman work in saving Mis-
[souri. with its large German population, for the
Union. Both generals suffered reverses, but
Schurz. through no fault of his own, was
routed. German-speaking soldiers, when asked
jwhom they were serving with, would reply,
h fights mit Sigel and I runs mit Schurz."
iniiriii!,iii'iiiniiniinii3iinii3ii3ii!iiinii!iirTi!ii
Black Men Battle Bondage
Altogether about 180,000 blacks served in the
Union armies, most of them from the slave states
but many from the free-soil North. Blacks ac-
counted for about 10 percent of the total enlist-
ments in Union forces, on land or sea, and in-
cluded two Massachusetts regiments raised largely
through the efforts of the ex-slave Frederick
Douglass.
Black volunteers were at first rejected. Race
prejudice, fear of arming blacks, and a feeling that
white men should fight their own war raised a for-
bidding hand. But as manpower ran low' and
emancipation was proclaimed, black enlistees
Frederick Douglass
(c. 1817-1895). Bom
a slave in Maryland.
Douglass escaped to
the North and became
the most prominent
black abolitionist.
Gifted as an orator,
writer, and editor, he
continued to battle for
the civil rights of his
people after emanci-
pation. Near the end
of a distinguished
career he served as
U.S. Minister to Haiti.
(Library of Congress.)