All that you know about them is how they behave in certain activities. They do not stand out so clearly in your minds. It is even more difficult to describe clearly whole groups of people. How would you describe all the people in your school or neighborhood? You might begin by describing the behavior, beliefs, and physical characteristics that are shared by almost everyone in the group. Those are the details that are repeated often enough to apply to almost everyone, most of the time. When people describe groups, they have to leave out the details that make one person stand out from another. A group description is useful, but it is not an accurate description of any one individual who belongs to that group. Describing people is partly a matter of choosing a place from which to view them. When seen up close, the details about a single person are clear to the viewer. The farther away from a person the viewer gets, the harder it is to see details. But from far away it is easier to tell what groups people move in, where they live, who else lives nearby, and when and where their lives meet. From far away you can see the landscape of a place. You have to move in closer to be able to see hills, water, and traffic patterns of the same place. Looking at people in time also involves deciding whether to look at them from far away or up close. If you back away from people Americans have their roots in every nation in the world. Where can you see this variety in your community? * in time, you can see how long they have lived in a certain place, why they came to live there, and whom they have met along the way. In fact, the farther back in time you step, the more easily you can notice changes in other people's lives. Stepping back has some advantages. But when you do it, you have to be careful not to miss important details. Studying people is like looking at a large painting or at a tapestry, a woven picture. The closer you get, the more detail you can see and recognize. The farther away you get, the more parts of the big picture you can take in at one time. But the tiny details, the brush strokes, the threads or stitches do not show. Large patches of color show from farther away. But up close you can tell what those colors are made of. Up close, you can even notice different shades of gray. Studying Americans There are over 200 million people living in the United States of America. People's lives are tied to each other in many ways. People need to know how and why they are connected. They need to know what other Americans are like. They need to know what being connected means. But what would you do if someone asked you to describe Americans? Not just one American or a town full of Americans. You would have to describe all the people who have been and are called Americans within the United States. That is what this textbook will try to do. In each unit, a particular way of looking at Americans will be described. Then the story explaining how that way of looking at Americans developed will be told. The distances from which the descriptions will be made will differ. Sometimes the view will be up close—to see how individual people have thought and felt and acted. Sometimes the view will be from far away, in order to see groups of people and the important changes in their lives. America Is a Variety of People The first way in which this book will describe Americans is by stepping back and looking at the variety among them. Americans are a variety of languages, skin colors, habits, and customs. Freedom of religion is an American value. How has this American value influenced your life? Americans live and work in small towns and large cities. What can you see in this picture that shows what is important to Americans? Even the first Americans—Native Americans—were not one people. They were and are a variety of people. The groups of Europeans who later came from across the Atlantic Ocean to explore America were also different from each other. And the Europeans who came still later and settled the land were a variety, too. In looking at the earliest years, when only Native Americans lived here, and in looking at the years when Native Americans and Europeans met, it is possible to see that America is—and always has been—a variety of people. Yet even with such variety, there were some beliefs and goals that became the shared or common ones for Americans. In the study of people, you—as the viewer, or observer—have to choose the best distance for what you want to see. As you do this in this first unit, think about the following questions: 1. How did the land and climate in different areas affect the way people lived? 2. What were some of the beliefs and values that guided people's daily lives? 3. How were individuals in one area connected to one another? 4. Which beliefs and ways of living have lasted and are part of people's lives today? By 1700 the North American continent held people from very different backgrounds and cultures. The English organized governments and ran the major trading businesses. Other people from Europe were filling up the land away from the coast. They brought their own way of life to these areas. The Swedes and Huguenots Swedes who settled in the Delaware River Valley developed the notched log cabin. Settlers moving west used this type of housing because it was cheap and easy to put together. The Huguenots were Protestant settlers from France. They were welcomed in South Carolina, Pennsylvania, New York, and Boston, because they worked in crafts and were highly skilled. Their work was valued by other settlers. The French tended to spread out and take on the characteristics of the English around them. In the south, the Huguenots even joined their church with the Anglican or Church of England. They did this because the Church of England was the most important church in the southern colonies. The Germans There were many more Germans than French in the English colonies. By the middle of the 1700's, there were said to be 100,000 German-speaking people in Pennsylvania alone. They came in response to Penn's advertising which had been translated into German and distributed along the valley of the Rhine River. There had been a whole generation of warfare in central Europe during which time the farmland had been ruined. German farmers were glad to leave for America. In America the Germans did not spread out and try to melt into the English city life. They lived together and tried to create German communities. Some Germans w'ere members of a peace-loving group, the Mennonites, that broke away from the Lutheran Church. Mennonites came to join the Quakers who seemed to lie much like themselves. The first group of Germans to come to America were led by Francis Daniel Pastorius. Their land grant, given by Penn in 1685, was just two miles (3.2 kilometers) northwest of Philadelphia. They called it Germantown. Pastorius brought hard-working people with him. There were doctors, bakers, seamstresses to name a few. They were followed by the Rittenhouse family who built the first paper mill in the colonies. The Germans planted fruit trees, cleared the land for farming, and showed everyone how' small communities could produce almost everything they needed. 19. What made the French Huguenots lose their identity as a group? 20. What reasons brought the Germans to the English colonies? 21. What privileges did the Jews enjoy in the English colonies? 22. what did the Scotch- Irish value? A later group of Germans came in the early 1700's and they were poor. They came as indentured servants and helped to provide the great profits in farming made by the large landowners. Within the ten years from 1737 to 1746, some 67 ships brought 15,000 Germans to Philadelphia alone. When their period of service was over, they moved even further west. This was the pattern in most colonies. Other Germans who came went to South Carolina and to Virginia. Wherever there was vacant land, the owner wanted Germans or German-speaking Swiss to settle on it because they worked so hard and so well. The Moravians, a small group of settlers from Austria came first to Georgia. But because they were so afraid of attacks by the Spanish, they moved to Pennsylvania and set up the towns of Bethlehem, Nazareth, and Lititz. They set up missions to convert the Indians and church schools. Every British colony had Germans in it. But in Pennsylvania there were even counties where German was the chief language. Jews The Jews who came to the English colonies were mostly the descendants of the Spanish Jews that had been thrown out of Spain in 1492. They were called Sephardim. They had settled in Holland. The first group to come to America settled in New Amsterdam as early as 1654. There were Jews in every colony, but they were most welcome in Rhode Island which allowed freedom of worship. Newport, Rhode Island was the center for Jews in the northern colonies. They built a synagogue in 1763, which was paid for by contributions from Jews throughout the British colonies in America. Other important Jewish congregations were in Charleston, Philadelphia, and New York. Peter Kalm, a Swedish scientist who traveled in the colonies in the mid-1700's was surprised at the success of the Jews in America and of the freedom they had, compared to Jews in Europe. What surprised Kalm, because it was so unusual in Europe, was that in Kalm's words "Jews enjoy all the privileges common to the other inhabitants of this town and province." The Scotch-lrish After 1700 a great number of people came to the English colonies from Scotland. The English had moved many Scots into northern Ireland in the 1600's in order to keep the Irish under control. But in the 1700's, English policy toward the Scots changed. The English wanted to keep the Scottish weavers from competing with the English ones. So the Scots began to leave for America. They also had a religious reason for leaving. The Scots living in northern Ireland were Protestant Presbyterians. 7. Whit! changes did this bring about? 8. How did the mills keep the women workers on the job? 9. How did women workers organize? It was no wonder that the American manufacturers, especially in the New England and the middle states, wanted higher tariffs. The transportation costs for European goods were cheap on the efficient steamships. Therefore, the prices of imported goods were lower than those of American products. The British fleet of modern ships was more desirable than the American one. But the American wooden steamships did well carrying American cotton and Canadian lumber to Europe and bringing back manufactured goods. They also brought back immigrants from Europe. These people were crowded into converted cargo space, and many became ill. But without cheap transportation, the European poor could not have come to America at all. Urban Living for Women Factory Workers The earliest years in the spinning mills were exciting for the young farm women who came in answer to the factories advertising. For an unmarried woman to go to the city and live on her own had seemed a wonderful opportunity. She could live in a comfortable boardinghouse with a friendly atmosphere. But within ten years, life had changed for the mill workers. With more mills, each competed with the others and tried to keep down costs. All the mill would pay to the boardinghouses was $1.25 per week, w hich was deducted from the pay of each worker. The mills refused to pay more, so the boardinghouses had to crowd six to eight women in a room to make any profit at all. The mills used every possible method to keep young women on the job, including social pressure at the boardinghouse. The rules of one house said: "Each is to have her place at the table during meals. The two who have worked the greatest length of time in the factory are to sit each side of the head of the table. All new hands will of course take their seats lower down, according to the length of time they have been there." In addition to social pressure there was economic pressure. If a woman left the mill before a year was out, she was refused an honorable discharge and no one else in the area would hire her. She was blacklisted in every mill village. Women Strike Mills had not been in existence long before women began to protest the working conditions and long hours. Protests and turn outs, or Political Action 10. What made the mill workers' demand for a shorter work day valid? In order to cut costs, the mills bought new machines that could do the work faster. But the pay of the workers was the same as it had been 20 years before when the mills first opened. Mill workers worked a 75-hour week. They wanted to work fewer hours but they were afraid of losing their jobs. When their union fell apart during the panic of 1837, they did not dare start up another one. Instead they began to petition the state legislature for a ten-hour work day. One of their popular songs carried the message, too: John McCloskey, the son of Irish immigrants, became the first American cardinal of the Catholic Church. "But if I still must wend my way. Uncheered by hope's sweet song, God grant that, in the mills, the day May be but ten hours long." A leader for political action in this struggle was Sarah Bagley. During the 1840's she went from town to town, pressuring the state legislature to hold public hearings on working conditions. She also wrote articles for the woman's paper, the Lowell Offering. The organization she formed had as its slogan "Try Again," which was all the mill workers could do. But the petitions for shorter hours did not work. The owners of the mills had too much power and the women needed the jobs. The only hope was the news in 1840 that President Van Buren had signed an order stating that people who worked for the federal government would have the ten-hour day. But privately owned industry was slow to follow. Irish Immigrants The late 1840's saw a change in the working picture. Factory owners found a cheaper source of labor than unmarried New England farm women. When a potato famine hir Ireland, immigrants from that country began to pour into the New England area. They were peasants from the farms who were faced with starvation. They could not go to the South because slaves did the unskilled work there. There had always been a steady flow of immigrants to America. From the time of the Declaration of Independence to the period just before Jackson's election in 1828, about one million people had arrived. But in the ten years from 1840 to 1850 almost 2 million came, and in the next ten years another 2.5 million came. Forty percent of this number were Irish. In fact, one quarter of the total population of Ireland came to the United States in these years! Family Contracts The Irish came in family groups and went to work in family groups. In the mill towns they replaced the protesting mill women, who either took jobs as sales clerks or went home. The Irish families signed contracts for a year at a time. One contract signed by the Slater mill, in Rhode Island, showed how the whole family was employed: "Agreed with Abel Dudley for himself and family to work one year from the last day of March past. Mary and Caroline have the privilege of going to school two months each, one at a time. Amos (who was too young to go to school) is to work when they are out." If families did not work when they said they would, they lost the house which they rented from the factory. The family system was used throughout Rhode Island, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New York State, Virginia, Maryland, and the Middle West. More than half of all mill workers in the United States worked under the family system. A Permanent Class of Poor Workers The workers continued to try to get state laws passed for better hours. But when laws w'ere passed as in Pennsylvania in 1848, the owners simply lowered the wages. They wanted to expand. For those with money to invest, the 1840's were good years. But a permanent class of poor workers was developing in the eastern cities. The immigrants and their children could not take advantage of America's expansion. Their lives stood in great contrast to the lives of those who did benefit from the prosperous years of the 1840's. Machines and Jobs The invention of new machines like the sewing machine created mote jobs for unskilled workers. The American sewing machine was invented by Elias Howe in 1846. It was improved in 1851 when Isaac Singer invented a foot treadle to replace the hand wheel. It revolutionized the shoe business and the clothing business. Skilled hand tailors were put out of business as unskilled immigrant workers took over. The sewing machine made it possible for one person to do as much work in one day as 12 people sewing by hand for 10 hours. It was 11. David Bushnell Submarine 1787 John Fitch First American steamboat 1793 Eli Whitney Cotton gm 1802 Oliver Evans Steam engine 1827 Joseph Henry Insulated wire used in telegraph 1830 Peter Cooper First American locomotive 1831 Cyrus McCormick Reaper 1835 Samuel Colt Repeating pistol 1836 Hiram and John Pitt Thresher 1837 John Deere Steel plow 1839 Charles Goodyear Vulcanisation of rubber 1840 Norbert Rillieux Vacuum evaporator for refining sugar 1844 Samuel Morse Telegraph 1846 John Roebling Suspension bridges 1846 Elias Howe Sewing machine invented just as the Irish immigration hit its peak. Jobs were scarce and people competed for them. Men and women had to work taster to keep up with the machines. Although they produced more work in an hour, they received the same pay. Other Jobs for Unskilled Workers Irish women who could not find work in clothing and shoe factories became domestic servants. Over 2,000 Irish women became domestic servants in Boston. Earlier housewives had taken care of their own work or had paid farm women high wages. But Irish women needed work so desperately that they created a new domestic service in Boston. When the Irish came to Boston, they settled in poorer sections, or slums. Their arrival created a demand for better housing for others. Boston merchants built fine new homes on Beacon Hill and in the Back Bay area. The boom in house building did provide some jobs for the Irish. But most of the better jobs went to American-born workers. The commercial communiry of America was native-born. Some 90 percent of the merchants, 86 percent of the shipping agents, and even 88 percent of the clerks had been born in America. The Irish who did manage to have a profession usually served other Irish immigrants. People preferred priests and doctors and lawyers from their homeland. These were people they felt they could trust. New Businesses The supply of cheap Irish labor caused Boston to become an industrial city. People with capital deliberately moved to Boston to stan new businesses there. Among the new businesses were the Chickcring Piano Company and the Mason and Hamlin Organ Company. They employed over 1,000 workers. Donald McKay moved his shipyards to east Boston in 1845. And in ten years, over 1,000 men worked at shipbuilding. The people who benefited the most were native-born Americans. They were the owners—the people with capital. And they made the profits. But some Irish and Germans went into the clothing business, and an Irishman named John Donnelly started outdoor billboard advertising. Women's Rights Trying to help working women was difficult, since both men and women workers had so little power and needed their jobs so badly. But in 1848 at Seneca Falls, New York, a public effort was made to call attention to the problems of women who worked as well as those who did not. Originally planned for women only, the convention eventually was open to the public. Three hundred people came, including 40 men. Among them was Frederick Douglass, the ex-slave and antislavery leader. The main concerns of the meeting were economic. One was that in New York Stare married women had few property rights. Husbands could also spend their wives' earnings as they wished. Another concern was that women were not welcomed into apprenticeships. They could work as helpers, doing low-skilled work in print shops and the bookbinder and shoe businesses. But they were not allowed to enter the crafts and get the training to advance themselves. A resolution for women's vote, or suffrage, was passed at the convention. But it did not pass unanimously as did the other resolutions. The delegates reached unanimous agreement on all the other 14. What changes did the Irish immigrant i bring to Boston? This photograph shows Elizabeth Cady Stanton. She helped organize the first women's rights convention at Seneca Falls, New York. What was the goal of this meeting? This is u map showing Cincinnati, Ohio, in 1850. What can you locate on this map? ported the anti-Jackson Whig party and were the builders of roads and canals. They owned steamboats and were bankers and investors in the railroad. Immigrant groups who came later lived in other parts of the city. The Germans, who worked as skilled tradesworkers or laborers, built their homes and churches on the east side of the canal. The Irish group settled near the Ohio River. (See the map above.) The Jews were divided into two groups. Those who came before 1848 had lived first in eastern American cities. They settled in the eastern part of Cincinnati, while those who came in 1848 and 1849 settled on the west side of town. Each group had a separate synagogue, but they shared one burial ground. In the year 1850, Cincinnati had a population of 115,000 people. Only 3,300 of the people were Jews. But Christianity was not a way of uniting people. In the newer river communities, each new I group started its own church. The Catholics and Protestants in I Cincinnati built different churches, depending on national origin I and also on race. For example, the Catholics built 17 churches. I Seven of them were known as German churches. Of the seven I Baptist churches, twro were for Blacks. Of the 14 Methodist churches, three were for Germans. People of different social classes B also went to different churches, depending on the neighborhoods they lived in. Neighborhoods were divided by the size of houses and the amount of property each had. What immigrant groups came later? 20. Why wasn't Christianity a way of uniting people? Irish Immigration to the United States, 1840-1855 "Raise your hand. How many want to play baseball?" How old were you the first time you raised your hand, and someone in the group quietly and seriously counted the hands and then announced what everyone was going to do? It probably happened the first time you were allowed to go our and play with other children. You learned at that moment that it is easier to get your way when more people agree with you than disagree. You learned that outside your home, decisions often are made by a show of hands. This method of making decisions is based on tw-o important beliefs. One is that every single person should be heard. The other is that what most people want is more fair than what only a few want. The majority rules. Majority rule by law shows up in your life every time you stop for a traffic light, go to school, get a vaccination at the doctor's office, and pay sales tax on the records and books that you buy. If you are in a hurry, you must still stop at the light. It you would rather sleep in on a weekday, you cannot. On school days, you must get up. As a citizen, you must do what the majority of society wants. You may not like vaccinations, but you must get one so that you will not give contagious, preventable disease to others. You may not like paying a little extra when you buy a book or record, but these sales taxes are one way that your state gets money for public schools and road repairs. Majority rule can be a matter of custom or habit. "Why do I have to wear shoes on the train?" Majority rule does not bother people when jobs are available, prices are not too high, and when everyone follows the same customs and has the same values and the same taste in spending their money. Action by the Minority If you are in the minority, and a belief thac is very important to you is at stake, w'hat can you do about it? You can try to convince other people that yours is a better point of view. One of the advantages of living in a country that guarantees free speech, free press, and the right to call meetings is that minorities can tty to become a majority. This has worked time and again in American history. People do sell ideas to each other, and people's ideas do change. Sometimes people's ideas change because they gain more information and discover important facts they had not known before. Sometimes people change their minds because they find out that the change would be helpful to them, too. It is in their interest to change. Some people change their minds because they come to believe that their earlier point of view was wrong. Morally, they now hold a different opinion and they are willing to say so in public. Some people only change when they can make a trade with someone else. "I'll do what you want this time—if you'll do the same for me on something else." This is an element of compromise. You may not like some compromises. But compromises are important because they sometimes achieve solutions. These solutions are agreed upon by the greatest number of people, the majority. However, sometimes you cannot get what you want by majority rule. Perhaps what you want is too expensive, or too dangerous, or too selfish. Perhaps what you want is really better and more fair for some people. But if not enough people care, the majority will not help you. This is very frustrating if the position of the minority is morally right. In that case, the majority has to be persuaded to do what is right. What else can people who belong to a minority do besides persuade? If they disobey the law then, like Thoreau, they have to be willing logo to jail. To break the law in protest and then hide or run away is an action that destroys the idea of majority rule and the idea of rule by law1. People who break the law must take the legal consequences of their action for government by the people to exist. Otherwise, laws and guarantees of rights will not be there when they want the majority on their side on some other question. People who do not like a law or ruling by a judge and simply break it are saying that law is only useful for the majority. Their action denies all the rights built into America's Constitution and its history. To be in the minority is very difficult. But to be in the minority when the majority is morally wrong is even worse. Every time citizens of a democracy find themselves in the minority, they have to decide how to become a majority or howr to protest and still keep the system that guarantees government by the people. These questions of how to keep representative government under majority rule and how to guarantee minority rights became the most important questions for Americans in 1850. At that time, the minority in the South wanted its legal rights and its guaranteed I protection. But this minority knewr that it would never be part of a voting majority again. And, worst of all, some of the southern minority knew that their position w'as morally wrong. How' could the American nation do what was legal and what was right? chapter 17 War and Peace: For what? 1861-1876 Lincoln, like Calhoun before him, understood exactly what was at stake. Majority rule had to be preserved for the health of the Union. Minority rights had to be preserved for the liberty of individuals. When the two were in conflict in 1850, Calhoun had chosen minority rights, even though the minority were slaveholders. Lincoln in his time chose majority rule, even though it meant civil war. Both men were aware of the price to be paid for taking one side or the other. Both men suffered the agony of making decisions that could not be reversed. Both were attacked as if they had not seen all sides to the question. And both took their responsibility as leaders seriously, because they believed that the United States could still serve as an example of self-government to the rest of the world. 1861 1862 1863 1861-1865 Who? General Beauregard of the Confederacy Blacks Union and Confederate soldiers Ciora Barton What? leods an attack on the federal garrison organize Into Union regiments fight a bottle supervises rxrses on the battlefield Where? at Fort Simter In South Carolina in the North at Gettysburg in Pennsylvania behind Union inas Black soldiers recruited for the Union army fought bravely at the storming of Fort Wagner, South Carolina. Over 200 Blacks were killed in the fighting. Draft Riots Some of the recent immigrants to the United States did not like the fact that they were being drafted into the northern army to help free Blacks, who could then come north and take their jobs. Riots against the draft broke out in several cities. The worst was in New York, where the mob attacked the houses and shops of Blacks. Slowly the attitudes ol many people toward Blacks began to change. Blacks were recruited for the army. They were often assigned chores around camp and, until 1864, they were paid less than White soldiers. They had separate regiments and White officers, but their bravery helped to convince a great many northern Whites of the loyalty of Blacks to the United States. Twenty-one Blacks received the Congressional Medal of Honor for outstanding heroism during the Civil War. 13. Why did northern immigrants oppose the draft? 14. Hou did the Blacks change people's attitudes? 4 33 schools, and in other public places. The North was also segregated, but it did not have as many Blacks as the South. And it had more jobs. The nation continued to grow. In 1867 the Russians made a surprise offer to sell Alaska to the United States. Secretary' of State William Seward agreed to the price of $7,200,000. The purchase of Alaska was ridiculed as "Seward's Folly." No one believed that Alaska was worth two cents an acre (2/5 hectare). In 1869 the transcontinental railroad connecting the Northeast to the West was completed by two railroad companies, the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific. (See map, page 447.) Both operated under government land grants of 23 million acres (9-2 million hectares) and easy government loans of $64 million. A gold- headed spike wras driven into the railroad tie at Promontory Point, Utah, to mark the completion of the transcontinental railroad. Its completion finished the hope of the South to compete with the North for generations. The railroad had taken 20,000 workers three years to build. Many of the workers were Chinese. It was 1,775 miles (2,840 kilometers) long. Chinese, Irish, Mexicans, and Native Americans worked together to lay the tracks for the transcontinental railroad. There seemed to be no way to stop the powerful in business and in government. Bur the cartoonists of the day and some newspaper people began to pay attention to what they did and inform the public. Thomas Nast, who drew cartoons for Harper's Weekly, was most famous for his exposure in 1871 of Tammany Hall and its leader, "Boss" William Marcy Tweed. This was the organization that controlled jobs and money in New York City. When the United States celebrated its 100th birthday, the Centennial, in 1876, there was much pride in all that expansion had accomplished. There was pride in individual achievement. There was a growing awareness that the manufacturing, transportation, and banking industries of the North were very strong. Uneven Progress The South was badly beaten in the Civil War. Blacks and Native Americans were being "placed" in society where the powerful Whites wanted them. Working men and women were organizing for their own good into unions. Also, some women began to talk about getting the vote and even running for office. Now that former slaves were voting in some places and had their own constitutional amendment, the women began to be interested in politics as a way of having a voice. Wyoming women got the vote in 1869. But Susan B. Anthony of Rochester, New York, was fined for voting in 1872. The West seemed more able to accept change. But western workers were not happy with the Chinese laborers brought in to work for little money on the railroads. The Majority Grows The majority forces that were moving to connect the separate regions in the United States were forces that believed in liberty, opportunity, representation, expansion, and individualism for those who could compete. Now they added another characteristic—big- ness. Why should a business or a movement or an idea remain small? It became the American way to be big. ICheckinp the facts "N 1. What were the important events of the Reconstruction period? Why were they important? 2. What was life like for the Blacks after the Civil War? 3. How did the completion ot the transcontinental railroad affect the Native Americans? During and after the Civil War, Susan B. Anthony dedicated her life to organizing women in their fight to get the vote. 10. Why did immigrant) in* when they did? 11. Why dtd immigrants from the tame country duster in neighborhoods? Immigrants arriving at Ellis Island in New York presented their papers to immigration officials. Later they were examined by health officials. New York: The Largest Immigrant City Big cities were an important part of modern America. Cities were the places where work could be found. In the cities jobs were the key to the future. A great many of the workers in rhe big cities were foreign-born or the children of immigrants. Between 1880 and 1910, 8Vi million southern and eastern Europeans came to America looking for jobs. In one year, 1907, over half a million Italians and Russians arrived. They lived where the work was—in the central business, factory, and dock sections of the biggest cities. Others like them also had to live close to their jobs in the same neighborhood. Where were the families who had been in America longer? They had saved enough money to buy better housing and had moved out of the cities. People who could afford to ride the trolley to work and afford better housing lived as far from the factories as possible. Therefore, the new immigrant working families had only each other to know and rely on. Housing and the new electric trolleys had separated them from other Americans. Worker Neighborhoods The worker neighborhoods of the cities were often divided into smaller sections. They were made up of families who came from the same country in Europe. There were clusters of city blocks which were either almost entirely Polish, or Italian, or Russian. These little neighborhoods of immigrants from a particular country became centers of daily living for many new' Americans. These neighborhoods were like islands within the giant city. Whatever people needed was supplied right there. Germany 16% Scandinavia Russia 10% Other Europe 20% Ireland 13% Other Americas 8% Great Britain 11% Immigration to the United States by Country or Continent, 1820-1925 Asia 2% Total Immigration: 33,654,803 Another Countries 2% Where else would a newcomer go, except to old friends of the family in Europe or to those who spoke the same language, ate the same food, and went to the same place of worship? Often when newcomers arrived in America, they only had the address of someone from their native village or church or synagogue. These newest arrivals simply moved in with relatives, friends, or friends of friends. Sweatshops: The First Jobs Newcomers were given a room to sleep in and the chance to learn a trade. And the trades requiring the least skills were the "needle trades"—making clothes. Owners or contractors from larger businesses squeezed all they could out of the immigrant workers. The owners were called "sweaters," and the rooms the poor lived and worked in were called "sweatshops." The sweater's own room was often the shop. The beds or cots were moved during the day to I make room for the sewing machines. i 12. What effect did the Su eatshups have on immigrants? Chinese immigrants had their own neighborhoods in the large cities. Both New York and San Francisco had large Chinese communities. I). How did the Americans live with the Chinese immigrants. 14. What purpose did the Muckrakers sent? It often took more than a generation for immigrants to move out of this condition, because the pay was low. There were three times the number of women as men in some of the sweatshops. Children were kept out of school so that they could earn pennies in the sweat shops. In that way the family could survive. Women w'ere grateful that they could do some of this sewing in their own apartments while taking care of their small children. They would take any wages offered. This lowered the rate for others who would go out to work. Newcomers and Old-timers Although the different ethnic groups took care of their own, the older groups did not treat the newcomers any better than they had been treated. Advertisements for jobs once had said, "No Irish need apply." Now they carried other group names. The Irish had become the landlords of the slum buildings where newer groups lived. Blacks were the worst off of all. They were kept out of even the low-paying jobs by the employers who hired the immigrants first and then by the immigrants who got jobs for their own families and friends. Slum landlords of all groups refused to rent to Blacks, or rented only certain blocks of certain neighborhoods to Blacks. The Chinese The Chinese who came to the West Coast also had difficulty. They came to work in the mines and on the transcontinental railroad. But when these jobs were over, American workers began to worry that the Chinese would take their jobs away from them. They started an anti-Chinese campaign. It was especially strong in San Francisco. The result was the Chinese Exclusion Act, passed in 1882. This act set a limit, or quota, on the number of Chinese who could immigrate to the United States. It also denied American citizenship to Chinese born in China. The act remained in force until World War II. The Muckrakers A number of professional writers focused on the struggle of the poor in the cities. They wrote detailed accounts of daily life in the slums. They hoped to rake up and expose the problems and, thereby, get other people and the governments to do something to help. One of the best known of these muckrakers was Jacob A. Riis. In his book How the Other Half Lives, he described how each new group that entered America suffered but survived by controlling one local business or trade for itself: "Sunday, Women Drying Their Hair" was painted by John Sloan in 1912. Immigrant women worked hard and found little time for leisure. "The Italian garbage collector of our time is fast graduating into exclusive control of the corner fruit stands, while his . . . boy monopolizes the boot- blacking industry in which a lew years ago he was an intruder. The Irish hod carrier in the second generation has become a bricklayer, if not the representative of his ward, w'hile the Chinese worker is in almost exclusive possession of the laundry business. The reason is obvious. The poorest immigrant comes here with the purpose and ambition to better himself and, given half a chance, might be reasonably expected to make the most of it." Riis answered the charge that the poor created the bad conditions 1 under which they lived. The muckrakers reminded their readers that the poor could not be judged without judging the system in I America w'hich caused urban newcomers so much suffering. [ Where They Lived I Many of the immigrants who came to America around the early I 1900s w'ere from poor farms and small villages in Europe. Some I of them went to farming areas in America. But in order to buy a 1 y 1t'by did only a feu immigrant! go to the farming communities? farm they had to borrow money, and it was hard for strangers to get credit. OnCe they bought the farm they had no one to help them. There were no social activities to remind them of home. Having more space was not enough. The farms were isolated and poor. At least in the cities the immigrants had friends, activities, and the hope that one job might lead to a better one. Housing in the City' 16. Wibat wtrt i/m fte- Housing was a terrible problem in a crowded modem city. Housing tuns of ttnmcnt bousing close enough to the factories, shops and docks, w'as needed for the and uby um tenmunn thousands of immigrants who must walk to work. These people b*iit.J could afford very little rent. So houses were designed and built to get as many people as possible onto the smallest amount of land. From 1880 to 1920, the years of the great immigrations from Eastern Europe, builders in New' York City put up structures that were six or seven stories high. Each floor had three or four apartments. The lots were 25 feet (7.50 meters) wide. They ran 100 feet (30 meters) deep. They used the smallest amount of street- front space possible. As early as 1903, more than tw'o-rhirds of New York City's population of 3 Yi million people lived in these tenements. Each tenement contained more than a hundred people. They led a miserably crowded life. The tenements had an air shaft which ran up the center of the building. Half the rooms in the building faced on this air shaft. But the air shaft was only open at the top. Instead of being a source of fresh air, the shaft w'as a trap for stale air. When a fire broke out in the rooms on lower levels, the draft of hot air was drawn through the shaft and rapidly spread the fire to the apartments above. Immigrant families often lived in overcrowded apartments in tenements. Adjusting Meant Helping Each Other The people who left Russia, Poland, Greece, Lithuania, and Italy for the United States in the early 1900's realized that the life they would find in America would be much different from anything they knew. That is why they came. They wanted to try something new. The tales of the great new7 American businesses and their huge new factories in the growing cities meant jobs and opportunity. These were changes that they wanted. To have those opportunities they had to learn to live in cities, in crow'ded housing, and near strangers. That was not easy. To make life easier they learned to help each other. They organized themselves into groups. Together they could look out for each other. They tried to make their entry into the working and social life of America less painful. Their neighborhood newspapers were written in their native languages. They published lists of families in need. They told people w'here to take clothes and furniture to help the needy. There were notices in the editorial pages and in news columns about how to apply for a job and how American workers were supposed to act. There were ads for classes in English which would help families learn the new' language. The new immigrants were friendly toward anyone who spoke their language or belonged to their church or synagogue. Before coming to America, friends and families were often in the same or nearby villages. They did not know people in other towns. They thought of and identified themselves by name and by village. Once in America they began to think of themselves as Italian or as Jewish. The common language gave them a sense of belonging. For the first time in their lives people from all over Italy and Sicily began to think of themselves as Italians. This happened while they were trying to become Americans. It was the first step in reaching out beyond their own relatives to people who were strangers. This tie to strangers through language and religion was also experienced by Eastern European Jew's. They used a common language, called Yiddish. Many European Jews who had to live in separate Jewish sections of towns spoke Yiddish as well as the national language of their home country. Yiddish was a street language. It consisted of several German dialects and added w'ords from Polish and Russian. Yiddish was written in Hebrew letters. This meant that immigrant Jew's from different places could use Yiddish to speak and write to each other. In the strange new city life, Yiddish allowed Eastern European Jew's to feel more comfortable while learning about new jobs, new7 customs, new' neighbors, and new neighborhoods. 17. What purposes did the native language newspapers serve? 18. What happened to immigrants as a result of living in ethnic neighborhoods? /$>. How did Yiddish unite the Jewish immigrants? Parents and Children 20. How dui the immigrant children become different from their parents/ This immigrant Jewish boy is wearing a prayer shawl. He probably speaks both Yiddish and English. The immigrant parents who had decided to live in America expected to learn new jobs and live among strangers. They did not realize in how many other ways their lives would change. They became worried that their children were learning new rules of behavior from the other families in this new mixture of city life. They often felt that their children were no longer under their control. The adults often stayed at home. They became friendly w'ith people who were as much like themselves as possible. The children, however, met children from other backgrounds in school or at play on the city streets. These children talked and played differently. Many stories of immigrant families describe the arguments between the older and younger generations. As they met children from other backgrounds the children of immigrants decided that their parents' language, food, and rules for entertainment were strange. One child of immigrant parents wrote: "At the age of five 1 knew Yiddish better than English. I attended my first day of kindergarten as if it were a visit to a new country. The teacher asked the children to identify various common objects. When my turn came she held up a fork and without hesitation, I called out its Yiddish name, a 'goopel.' The whole class burst out laughing at me. That afternoon I told my parents I had made up my mind never to speak Yiddish to them again, though I would not give any reasons." Children could wander dowrn the street and out of their immigrant neighborhood into another. There was an Irish section, an Italian section, and a Russian Jewish one. The children made jokes about each other. Sometimes fights broke out. But even the fights proved to the children of the tight little neighborhoods that there were other ways to live. In the crowded misery of a new industrial city, only the idea of the future made poor people feel better. It was an old American value dating from the earliest colonial times. The immigrants were willing to endure present suffering. After all, life would be better for their children. The early American values of control over one's life and the chance to make it better were some of the reasons why the thousands of immigrants came to America. They suffered the hardships of living in the crowded cities because at least in America they were free to try to get ahead. If America spoke, what would it speak? In what language would you hear America talking? More than 25 million Americans today are bilingual; they speak two languages. Most of these people are not recent immigrants. They use one language in their homes and communities—with their families, in local stores, and in churches and clubs—and speak English on their jobs or in public meetings. In the United States, English gives you the widest possible audience of listeners. You can speak to other Americans. You can speak to people in far away countries. Many people consider English the national language of the United States. However, the Constitution of the United States names no official national language. In early America, people tolerated many languages. They kept their native language, and learned English. They used their native language in their religion, social activities, and often for local government and newspapers. Public schools in large cities of America held bilingual classes. Only in the late nineteenth century did efforts begin to replace these languages with English. In schools, teachers gave more and more attention to defining standard or correct English. Schools worked to establish this kind of English as necessary for all professional and government functions. Factories offered English classes at night for workers. People began to use standard English as a symbol of hard work, self-improvement, and success. This standard language came to be a national symbol of unity. People talked about differences in the speaking and writing styles of others. Different ways of pronouncing words, putting them together in sentences, and naming things were called dialects. A Southerner working in a northern city found that people did not like the way he or she talked. Black, Irish, German, and Italian speakers learned that, in order to be understood, they had to change their ways of speaking when they talked to their bosses. Regional, ethnic, and social differences in language became ways people sorted out their friends and fellow professionals. Everywhere there were strong pressures telling speakers of different languages and dialects to give up their ways of talking and to speak only standard English. Yet in spite of these pressures, many people kept their native languages as well as their regional and social dialects of English. That is why today so many Americans born in the United States are bilingual. Their families and communities have kept the pattern of using one language at home and another in public situations. Today, as in the nineteenth century, some public schools have bilingual classes where students have an opportunity to use their native tongue, as well as the English language. 21, How did tht public schools sot it tlx language problem.3 22. Vl'hat did Julia Ricbman do to help tht immigrant families? An American Language? School administrators and teachers were worried about how to teach the American language and customs to so many immigrant children at one time. For example, in Boston one out of three children was foreign-born. In Philadelphia it was one our of four. Four out of five New Yorkers were either foreign-born or the children of those who were. Because of the housing situation, most of the immigrants' children who spoke a European language went to the same schools. For example, in 1905 there were 38 elementary schools on the East Side of Manhattan that held a total of 65,000 students. Ninety-five percent of those students were Jewish. Teachers debated whether the foreign-born should be taught in a group or whether they should be separated and put into classes with American-born children. The policy before 1903 was to put immigrant children into classes with much younger American-born children. When their English improved, the immigrant children were allowed to go to class with children their own age. However, the great number of children from different language backgrounds caused the schools to try a new plan. In 1904 foreign-born children were placed in special language classes. In this way English could be taught as a second language to students who all shared the first language. The native language could then be used as a basis for comparison with English. After five months many students had learned enough English to enter regular classes. Immigrants and the Public Schools One of the New York City District School Superintendents, Julia Richman, saw' the public school as a service to the whole immigrant family. Through the school, the family could learn the information and customs that would help it become part of American life. Richman changed the subject matter from memorized history of the United States to w'hat she called practical civics. In civics, the immigrants could learn the real workings of the American government. In the schools in her district, students also had to follow strict rules about grooming, manners and proper ways of speaking to people. Julia Richman knew how important it was to involve parents in the children's education. She organized parent groups. The schools sponsored lectures on practical subjects such as: How to Preient Illness in Children, First Aid to the Injured. Trade Unions—Why They Came and What They Do, The Street Cleaning Department. Lectures were also given on American history, music, and art. Many immigrant children learned English in public school classes like this one. In what other ways did the public schools help immigrant children adapt to American life? Nurses were placed in the public schools, as a way of giving health care to every family. Children had regular eye examinations in school. Some schools had public baths because the facilities in the tenements were so poor. To both parents and children the public schools were a way of 23. What price did im- becoming part of the United States. But in doing so, children had migrants pay for beaming to give up some of their closeness to parents and grandparents. a part of tbt United This was a high price. It was not possible to stay in one ethnic or s"lUl religious neighborhood forever. It was not possible to work and vote or to help others and be helped without speaking English and without learning the new culture and customs of America. Try ing to Improve The crowded slum neighborhoods continued to exist. But the people who lived in them were not the same families year after year. For example, in the Italian sections of Chicago, half of the families Business and socializing took place on streets in immigrant neighborhoods. Why do you think it was important for immigrants to help each other? changed housing each year. However, Italians continued to make up between 50 and 75 percent of the population in those sections. Those who learned better skills and got better jobs could rent better housing. 24. Hou dui th, immi- Immigrants worked to improve their own lives and those of other graini u -rh to nupr-tt newcomers in several ways. People needed to deposit money in a safe place and also send it to relatives in Europe. Owners of neighborhood grocery stores tried to provide that service. Very few people had enough money to loan to others. Few people would lend money to those who owned no property and had no savings. The immigrant grocery store became a sort of bank. These "banks" required no credit references. Any new neighbor who wanted to buy and send a steamship ticket to a relative in Italy could go to one of these "banks." The "banker" charged him or her a fee for the service. The banks operated without any government rules or controls for a number of years. When controls were set up to prevent cheating a customer, they were not very strict controls. The success of the system depended on trust between neighbors. What do newcomers in a giant city do when they are sick? How do they find a doctor? How do they pay for a serious illness? Groups of neighbors set up mutual-benefit organizations. They got together with people who came from their native country. Separate small clubs of Italians merged into one larger organization called the Sons of Italy. Several Polish groups formed the Polish National Alliance. The dues paid by each member formed a fund. Members could draw on it when they were ill and out of work. They could ask for money to help pay doctor bills and funeral expenses. These organizations gave people a sense of belonging that they had lost when they left their native land. They gave them help at a rime when other Americans did not know or care about them. Social events were usually neighborhood affairs. The synagogues and churches served as centers of activity and help. Parties and celebrations were often organized around religious holy days. Social workers in settlement houses also helped the new immigrants to improve their lives. They held English classes, sewing classes for women, and political and social dubs for men. The social workers sponsored neighborhood theater groups and summer camps, such as the Fresh Air Camps. City children could go to these camps for two weeks in the summer. The camps were in the mountains and at lakes. The social workers often arranged for rural families to take the city children for a summer holiday. They also set up free employment agencies. People from the neighborhoods could now find out about jobs without having to travel around the city. Immigrant groups also worked to improve their lives through the local city political organization. The city was divided into wards which were under the control of the city government. The mayor's office and the big city-wide jobs were often in the hands of earlier arrivals, the Irish-Americans. But the newcomer Italians could get control over the ward and jobs like sanitation and street repair by working for the election of the Irish. And the Irish ward leaders, in turn, gave day-to-day ward control to the various Italian American politicians. The various organizations the immigrants developed to help themselves were fair when the people were fair. But when people accepted bribes or worked for criminals, the organizations could also get caught up in crime. Crime was one of the problems of people living in the crowded slums. Not every immigrant used every aid available. Some ignored all of the associations. But the immigrants believed in the future, and they used jobs and education to survive the early days of slum living. They had to see themselves as part of the America that valued opportunity, control, and liberty. They had to remember what they left in Europe and why they came to America. Many of them made their daily lives better by helping each other. 25. What senicts did the let fitment homes provide for the Heir immigrants? 26. What is meant hy ward politics? 27. What immigrants benefited from the various associations? Results of the Strike The strike ended in many factories in December 1909. Some workers were disappointed. They wanted to hold out longer—until the shirtwaist companies would agree to hire only union labor (a closed shop). But the companies offered workers shorter hours (52 hours a week) and four paid holidays a year. They also agreed to distribute the work during the off season. In that way each worker would have some pay and not be laid off. For the first time, employers agreed to buy needles and pay for electricity. Most of the women went back to work, willing to settle for better terms. Once they got what they wanted from the strike, many left the union. There was a tragic after-note to the strike. On March 25, 1911, a fire swept through the Triangle Shirtwaist Company in New York City. Over 100 workers died in the fire, most of them women. It was only after this tragedy that the city of New York established a new strict building code and revised the labor laws. Workers Across the Nation During this same period men and women worked for better hours and safer working conditions in the mills and mining towns across the nation. Women and children were hired for new textile mills. In the Southwest, immigrant Mexicans were hired to work on the railroads and on ranches and farms. These workers were not organized, but social workers and other reformers were beginning to speak up about the hours and working and living conditions among the Mexican laborers. The Mexican workers were often brought across the border by employers. They would work for less than the local American-born workers. Both men and women worked in the shirtwaist and clothing factories. What kinds of working conditions are shown in this picture? 15. What effect did the strike have on the shirtwaist workers? 16. What was the effect of the Triangle Shirtwaist Company fire? 17. Why was there little help from government in solving the problems of the workers? representatives ought to decide. Should there by any requirements for being heard? Should all people get an equal hearing? What do you think? What Do Americans Think About Expansion and Bigness? Americans value expansion and bigness. American businesses need to try new ideas and to sell to new customers. Americans wonder how they can expand and let organizations grow without losing their right to be represented when decisions are made. How can America expand without using up its natural resources? Americans are also asking whose money should pay for expansion. Should businesses expand only within the country, or should they expand in other countries as well? How can the United States cooperate with other countries to attain a common goal? What Do Americans Think About Majority Rule? Americans value majority rule. In this nation decisions are still made by counting how many people are in favor of an idea and how many are not. Americans believe that the people and ideas that receive the most support are the ones that something should be done about. Americans value minority rights too. They are looking for ways to use majority rule to help minorities get equal opportunities. What ideas have you heard for getting the majority of people to help minorities? Free to Preserve: Free to Improve This unit is the story of Americans in the twentieth century. Why do Americans today need to learn about the plans that have been debated and tried since 1900? It is important to know how plans developed. By understanding who was involved, what steps they took, and in what order they took them, it is possible to learn how to build on past strengths. As the story of twentieth-century America—trying to preserve and trying to improve—is replayed, think about the following questions as you read. Which are the correct goals for America? Which are the correct ways of reaching those goals? What should Americans do to preserve what is special about America? What should Americans do to help improve America? In the future what will Americans do with their freedom? How will Americans find solutions to the problems currently facing them? Many Japanese tame to the United States and settled in California. They suffered discrimination and segregation in schools and on jobs. Race and Foreign Policy Around 1905 and earlier many Japanese came to the United States to work. Racial discrimination against Japanese living in California made the situation between Japan and the United States worse. In the San Francisco school system, Oriental children were put into separate schools. The Japanese in the United States were angry about their mistreatment. Immigrants from Japan worked for little money. They were thought of as cheap labor and were thought to cause low wages for others who wanted jobs. This tension between two groups—Whites and Orientals—in California affected the nation's foreign policy. Theodore Roosevelt decided that it was time for the United States government to take action to resolve the problem. But how' could this be done? Problems within state school systems were supposed to be solved by the individual states. The federal government did not have the authority to make such rules for the states. 30. Why did Roosetelt enter the dispute over schooling for Japanese American immigrants? How was it resolved? often choosing them from among the fraudulent names. . . . The police are at the [ballot] box and they are there to see that the machine's orders are obeyed and that repeaters are permitted to vote on the names they, the police, have supplied. ..." Forgotten People Neither the President nor most of the reformers included Blacks or Native Americans among the people whom they were working to help. There were, however, some White people and a few Black leaders who worked outside government to call people's attention to the problems of Blacks. Segregation in the South was upheld by Jim Crow laws, which assigned Blacks special seats on streetcars and kept Blacks out of White hotels and restaurants. In the North, Blacks also experienced discrimination. Many White workers in the North were afraid that Blacks would compete with them for jobs. By the early 1900's, they had convinced most labor unions not to admit Blacks. In this period two Black educators wrote and spoke out to help Blacks. These two disagreed with each other about what Blacks could do to help themselves. Both men became well-known leaders. Booker T. Washington, the president of Tuskegee Institute, was the most powerful Black in America from 1895 to 1915. He was a friend and an adviser to Presidents Roosevelt and Taft and was greatly admired by Andrew Carnegie and other business leaders. In his book. Up From Slavery, published in 1901, he told how Blacks had progressed from slavery to citizenship in just one generation. He believed that because White people had all the power, they would have to make most of the changes. He did not think Blacks would be allowed to do more than manual labor jobs. He expected Blacks to keep to themselves socially. Washington believed that industrial education was the only way Blacks could get ahead in American society. The program at Tuskegee reflected his views. His students, who were Black, were trained for industrial and agricultural jobs involving manual labor. Washington never made a direct public attack on the Jim Crow laws. He was able, however, to raise money from Whites for his institute. The other outspoken Black educator was William Edward Burg- hardt Du Bois (IX)O-boys). In 1903 he began to speak out against Booker T. Washington's ideas. Du Bois was a graduate of Harvard. He believed that Washington was "leading the way backward." He disagreed with Washington on what Blacks could do to help themselves. He believed that political or governmental rights were the Booker T. Washington was a Black educator who organized a school for Blacks at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama in 1881. 4. V'h did Du Bob and olhen form the key to changing the position of Blacks in America. He also disagreed on what kind of education Blacks should have. In his view, the most talented 10 percent of the Black population should receive the same college education that the best White colleges were giving to their students. Blacks who read both Booker T. Washington's and Du Bois' writings were forced to choose sides. In his book of essays. The Souls of Black Folk, Du Bois stated: "Self-respect is worth more than land and houses. . . . So far as Mr. Washington preaches thrift, patience, and industrial training for the masses w*e must hold up his hands and work with him. . . . But so far as he apologizes for injustices, North or South, does not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting . . . and opposes the higher training and ambition of our brighter minds—so far as he, the South, or the nation, does this—we must . . . firmly oppose him." In 1905, with other Blacks such as William Monroe Trotter, a Harvard graduate and the editor of the Boston Guardian, Du Bois formed the Niagara Movement. The Niagara Movement called for ending discrimination based on race and color. In 1909, Du Bois joined forces with other Blacks, such as Ida Wells Barnett, the Reverend Francis J. Grimke, and Bishop Alexander Walters, and w ith Whites, such as Oswald Garrison Villard, Jane Addams, Mary E. Woolley, Rabbi Stephen S. Wise, and the Reverend John Haynes Holmes. They formed the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The purpose of the NAACP was to end discrimination in public life. But aid to Blacks was not seen as government's responsibility. Government leaders did not think of passing laws about prejudice against groups of people. Most of the legislation was concerned with businesses and workers. And people in politics debated about how much the President ought to do. Checking the facts 1. What had Roosevelt failed to do for all workers? 2. How did Lincoln Steffens find the big city political machines to be alike? 3- How did Booker T. Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois differ in their opinions of how to help Blacks? in America's history when so many people were arrested as Communist spies was known as the "Red Scare." About 6,000 people were arrested during the peak of the scare in 1920. Their homes were searched without court orders, or warrants. Fear and hatred were aimed particularly at new immigrants who had not yet become citizens. Some of them belonged to labor groups that wanted to change the American system of government. Some wanted no government at all. People w'ho believe this are called anarchists. When strikes occurred many people panicked. They thought that foreign revolutionaries, or radicals, were going to ruin the country. The fear became a kind of madness. In 1920 two men robbed a shoe factory in Massachusetts and killed a guard. Two Italian immigrants, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti, believed to be anarchists, were arrested and jailed for the crime. The trial was run unfairly. The judge joined in accusing the two men. They were kept in jail for seven years, and were finally executed in the electric chair. Whether or not Sacco and Vanzetti were guilty, their treatment was not proper under American law. But fear of Communists and fear of foreigners combined to cause some Americans to act outside the lawr. Limits on Immigration 7. 17 b) did thi numbrr "/'immigrants dr ; Many Europeans tried to come to America during the years after Ben Shahn painted this picture in protest of the Sacco-Vanzetti case. Sacco and Vanzetti are shown in the center, handcuffed. World War I. Jobs were scarce and the land was still suffering from having been used for battlefields. In 1919, 1 10,000 immigrants arrived, followed by 430,000 in the next year and 805,000 in 1921. Many Americans, even those who had been immigrants themselves, were afraid of these newcomers. They pressured their representatives in Congress to keep out immigrants from countries that might have "'Red' or leftist or just different ways of thinking or behaving. A new immigration law set up limits for each country that might send immigrants to the United States. These limits, or quotas, were supposed to keep the ethnic, or nationality, balance as it was in 1920. That is, of the 150,000 immigrants a year that were to be allowed into the country, more could come from Great Britain and northern Europe (France, Germany, Scandinavia, Switzerland) than would be allowed to come from other places. What actually happened was that all immigration dropped. Few people wanted to come from the countries that had the higher quotas. Italians and Greeks waited for years before they were allowed to come to the United States. Mexican Immigration The number of Mexicans who came to live in the United States more than doubled in the 1920's. Almost 500,000 Mexicans came during this time. This was almost 3 percent of the total Mexican population. American law discriminated against eastern Europeans. But Mexicans were able to enter tor a period of about five years without any trouble. 8. Vt'hat u tre the arrangements under which many Mexican Americans came to the United States? Some Mexicans came to escape the continual fighting during the revolutions in their country. But most came for jobs. Sometimes they were hired by or signed contracts with American companies before they left Mexico. This contract labor paid lower wages than Americans got but much more than could be made in Mexico. Most of the Mexicans came to work in the mines, on the railroads, and on the large farms of the West. In 1920 the largest numbers came to live in Texas. Others went to California, Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Kansas. Although many Mexicans were able to get jobs in the United States, they were not accepted into most communities. Many preferred to stay by themselves so that they could follow their customs and be close to their friends. A Mexican song and prayer popular at the time tells how many Mexicans felt: "Goodbye, my beloved country. Now I am going away; "I go to the United States, where I intend to work. . . . "I go sad and heavy-hearted to suffer and endure; My Mother Guadalupe, grant my safe return. . . . "I go to the United States to seek to earn a living. Goodbye, my beloved land; I bear you in my heart. "For I am not to blame that 1 leave my country thus; the fault is that of poverty, which keeps us all in want." 9. How did tht a ft ions of tht Ku Klux Klan relate to its goals ? In 1926 members of the Ku Klux Klan marched in Washington, D.C. How did the JCIan threaten American unity? A New Kind of Intolerance Even when the Red Scare was over, a number of organizations kept attacking foreigners and anyone else they felt was not American enough. The Ku Klux Klan took advantage of this situation to launch new attacks against immigrants and anyone who was not White, An- glo-Saxon, or Protestant. The Klan had almost disappeared after the Blacks in the South had been kept from voting. But now they had a new cause. They set up a national organization with a national magazine. They sold robes and masks. Almost 2 million Americans became Klan members in the early 1920's. The organization had strength in the North and the South. Atlanta, Georgia, was the Klan headquarters. But Chicago and Indianapolis had larger Klans than those of other cities. The Klan argued that modern ways of living were ruining the simpler way of life that had existed on farms and in small towns in America. The Klan wanted the nation to return to a style of living in which everyone knew everyone else and all had similar backgrounds. The Klan appealed to some real desires and real worries of many Americans. The Klan used secrecy and violence to enforce its ideas. Jews, Catholics, foreigners, and Blacks were its cargets. Most Americans did not buy its message of hatred. They spoke out against the Klan. Newspapers princed accounts of the tarring and feathering, the whipping, and hanging that Klansmen carried out under the protection of their masks. Problems After the War One of the problems in this postwar period was that organizations that really wished to help strengthen America by correcting some of its mistakes were also attacked by those who were afraid. Some people thought every reformer was a Communist. Mexican citizens were recruited for jobs during the war. They arc giving the "V" sign for victory. 11. A merit am treated during the war? Newcomers to California During the years of the depression, 350,000 refugees from the Dust Bowl of the Southwesc came to California. They came to escape the drought which made farming impossible in their area. The Californians called them Okies and Arkies and complained that they were lazy and unreliable. By 1939 these same people went to work in shipyards and defense plants. They made money and began to live the way other Californians did. Then they created the Mexican migrant workers as badly as they had been treated. The Mexicans were paid 20 cents an hour and lived in labor camps. J apanese- A mer icans There were thousands of Japanese-Americans. Some were born in Japan but had become American citizens. They were called Issei (ee-ZYE). Their children were, of course, American citizens, born in America. They were known as Nisei (nee-ZYE). In 1942, just two months after Pearl Harbor, the Army commander on the west coast sent a message to Washington, D.C. In it he stated that the large Japanese population in the West, particularly in California, was a real military danger. In response, a number of newspapers and members of Congress in both parties demanded that all American citizens of Japanese descent be removed from the west coast area. They feared the Japanese-Americans would help Japanese troops if there was an invasion of the mainland of the United States. President Roosevelt went along with the idea. In 1942 relocation centers were set up in Utah, Wyoming, Arizona, and Colorado. The Japanese-Americans were kept there until after the wrar. They were not physically punished but they lost their homes and jobs. They remained loyal to the United States. By February 1943 the Nisei asked to be allowed to serve in the army. One Japanese-American, Mike Masaoka, spoke at a congressional hearing: "In this emergency, as in the past, we are not asking for special privileges or concessions. We ask only for the opportunity and the right of sharing the common lot of all Americans, whether it be in peace or in war This is the American way for which our boys are fighting." Roosevelt: A Fourth Term! In 1944 Franklin Roosevelt wanted another term as President and got it. His vice-presidential running mate was Harry S Truman, to be revolutionary—Egypt, Iraq, and Syria. The Eisenhower administration continued to support Israel. It also gave some military assistance to the non revolutionary states of Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Lebanon, and Iran. The Soviet Union opposed Israel and gave military equipment to the revolutionary Arab states. And in 1959 still another trouble spot appeared. A revolution brought Fidel Castro to power in Cuba. This island was only 90 miles (144 kilometers) off the coast ol Florida. The United States hesitated to support Castro. American businesses had invested in Cuba. Americans bought a great deal of Cuban tobacco and sugar. The government that Castro overthrew, however, had become unpopular with the people. Castro became known as a Communist. What should the United States do? Is it wrong to interfere with the government of another country? Is it wrong not to give support to revolutions which overthrow dictators? What if the new revolutionary leader, like Castro, wants to help the poor but intends to be a dictator as w'ell? The United States decided not to support Castro. The Soviet Union did. Foreign policy toward poor nations of the third world had grown increasingly complicated as the cold war progressed. Living in a world with what seemed to be a permanent enemy was frightening and costly. Americans were torn between wanting to help people at home and wanting to help people abroad. In some ways, however, they just wanted to hold on to w'hat they already had. Checking the facts 1. What ended the McCarthy era? 2. How did Eisenhower conduct his foreign policy regarding communism? 3. What actions did Eisenhower take in support of equal rights? 1950's The automobile and the highway made it possible in the 1950's for many factories to move away from the cities, where the poor lived. Factories were moved to the suburbs, where the middle-class managers lived. And white- and blue-collar workers in the offices and in the factories moved there, too. Discrimination prevented Blacks from buying houses in many suburbs. And so they either 26. IVby did she United States hesitate about sup- [Hjrting Castro? 27. How dtd the mote to the suburbs affect Blacks? Suburbs began to pop up in many cities during the 1950's. Many consisted of tract homes such as these. All the homes were built from the same architectural plans. lost their jobs or had to travel long distances to get to work. If they did not own cars, it was often impossible for them to get to work. Very little money had been spent to provide public transportation to the suburbs. For the first time in American history, the poor and the newcomers could not find the low' skilled jobs that had always provided support for those groups. In the New York City area alone, 80 percent of the jobs created between 1952 and 1957 wrere in the suburbs. 28. Hau did educational opportunity improve,' 29. IVhy did Puerto Riian immigration drop off after 79532 More Education Americans who could afford it seemed to w'ant a higher quality w'ay of life. They w'anted better homes and better cars. They also wanted better education. The number of high school graduates had never been so high. At the end of the war, about one in every three adults had finished high school. By 1960 the number had increased to almost one in two. There was a 50 percent rise in the number of young people going to college. And there w-ere 9 million adults enrolled in continuing education courses. Puerto Ricans Come to America The newest group of newcomers to the United States were the Puerto Ricans. There had been some Puerto Ricans in the United States since the early 1800's. More had come after the United States won Puerto Rico in the Spanish-American War. The greatest number came after World War II. In the first year after the war, about 40,000 more Puerto Ricans came to the mainland United States chan left it to return to the island. In 1953, the peak year, the number reached 70,000. After that it dropped year by year, as businesses in the United States found themselves unable to sell all they could produce. When they began to lay off workers, it was often the last hired, including Puerto Ricans, who lost their jobs. Many wrenr home. Puerto Ricans were different from other newcomers. Puerto Ricans were American citizens when they arrived. And the government had made plans to help them settle before they left home. The government of Puerto Rico set up a Migration Division in the Department of Labor. It worked with governments and businesses in 115 mainland towns and cities. The aim was to make sure that Puerto Ricans had jobs and housing when they arrived. By careful planning, w'orkers from Puerto Rico would go where there were shortages of labor. And American businesses could not hire Puerto Rican workers at wages lower than the legal rate. Sixty- nine percent of Puerto Ricans on the mainland lived in New York City in I960. However, there were also Puerto Ricans in cities and on farms throughout the nation. Before Puerto Ricans came to the mainland, they were given a booklet. Entitled Guide to the Traveler, it explained how important it was to learn English, what kinds of clothing were needed in each climate zone, what family papers were needed for entrance into school, hosv to get a driver's license, and the problems of buying on the installment plan. This is the kind of aid that earlier immigrants had to find out for themselves. What was so different was that the Puerto Ricans were Americans. They got the information at home and from their government. By the time that the Puerto Ricans arrived, the policy was to integrate everyone in public housing projects. Puerto Ricans were spread all over the city rather than living near each other. Public housing was supposed to be better and fairer than ghetto housing. But scattered housing also made it hard for Puerto Ricans to offer each other neighborhood support. Puerto Ricans were the only Roman Catholics who did not have their own churches in their own language with the differences in the service that they were used to. Puerto Ricans had a major problem because many of them arrived in the city after so many industries had moved to the suburbs. Like Blacks who had migrated to cities before them, Puerto Ricans had In 1959 Hawaii was admitted as the fiftieth state. Students at the Kuhio School in Hawaii are shown reacting to the news. 30. What problems did Puerto Ricans encounter? Mobile learning center? such as this one were created to help Puerto Ricans learn English. What are the advantages of these centers? no cars and no money. They could not get jobs in the suburbs. The rivalry between Blacks and Puerto Ricans for scarce work in the city was serious. Tight competition for jobs existed in the needle trades, hotels, hospitals, and other places in which some low-skilled workers could begin to learn skills. Puerto Ricans also had problems with the civil rights movement. Many Americans had begun to encourage integration of the races. This seemed only natural to the Puerto Ricans who came from a society in which skin color was not a problem. But Puerto Ricans who had dark skins found that they were treated as badly by White Americans as Blacks were. It began to be important to look and sound different from Blacks. Instead of joining the civil rights movement and learning English, many Puerto Ricans stayed away from Blacks. Many decided that it would be better to continue to speak Spanish. Puerto Ricans began to organize when they saw that the Black power movement had shifted from integration to independence as a goal. Puerto Ricans who intended to remain in the United States realized that they would have to organize to get power, too. The Mexican Americans }l. What problems were Mexican American! having? In the years of World War II and immediately after, Mexican Americans were also having trouble. Their difficulty came from some special conditions in the market for cheap labor in the Southwest. And they also suffered from being seriously divided among themselves. One of their leaders who described the situation w'as Ernesto Galarza. Galarza had come to the United States in 1911. He was highly educated. He got a job with the American Federation of Labor. Galarza directed research and education for the National Mexicans line up to apply for permission to enter the United States to work legally. Farm Union. He believed that the main thing that Mexican Americans had in common was the low wages that they received. He believed that until the labor unions organized the farm workers, the Mexican Americans were still going to suffer. In addition to the Mexican Americans w-ho had lived in the United States for some time, there were two other groups of workers from Mexico. There were those who came as groups of contract laborers. Their contracts had been made between United States employers and the Mexican government. There were even treaties that encouraged this kind of labor contract. These workers were called "braceros." Although their work was legal, they were paid low wages that helped to keep all wages low. The other low-wage group consisted of illegal immigrants who crossed the wide border and took whatever work they could find and whatever wages they could get. They were called "wetbacks" in the 1950 s because they swam across the Rio Grande into the United States. They and their employers were hated both by the other Mexican Americans and by other workers who realized that 60,000 unskilled jobs in southwest Texas alone and another 20,000 on the giant farms and corporate ranches in the San Joaquin Valley of California would go to the cheapest labor available. Another split among Mexicans was the one between city people and farmers. Those who moved into the big cities, such as Los Angeles, San Antonio, and Chicago, learned to live like city people. They began to feel closer to other efty people than they did to other Mexican Americans. 